source : https://medlineplus.gov/ency/article/001074.htm 
 
 An anterior cruciate ligament injury is the over-stretching or tearing of the anterior cruciate ligament (ACL) in the knee. A tear may be partial or complete.Considerations

The knee joint is located where the end of the thigh bone (femur) meets the top of the shin bone (tibia).Four main ligaments connect these two bones:Medial collateral ligament (MCL) runs along the inside of the knee. It prevents the knee from bending inward.Lateral collateral ligament (LCL) runs along the outside of the knee. It prevents the knee from bending outward.Anterior cruciate ligament (ACL) is in the middle of the knee. It prevents the shin bone from sliding out in front of the thigh bone.Posterior cruciate ligament (PCL) works with the ACL. It prevents the shin bone from sliding backward under the femur. Women are more likely to have an ACL tear than men.Causes

An ACL injury can occur if you:Get hit very hard on the side of your knee, such as during a football tackleOverextending your knee jointQuickly stop moving and change direction while running, landing from a jump, or turning Basketball, football, soccer, and skiing are common sports linked to ACL tears.ACL injuries often occur with other injuries. For example, an ACL tear often occurs along with tears to the MCL and the shock-absorbing cartilage in the knee (meniscus).Most ACL tears occur in the middle of the ligament, or the ligament is pulled off the thigh bone. These injuries form a gap between the torn edges, and do not heal on their own.Symptoms

Early symptoms:A "popping" sound at the time of injury
   Obvious knee swelling within 6 hours of injuryPain, especially when you try to put weight on the injured legDifficulty in continuing with your sportFeeling of instabilityThose who have only a mild injury may notice that the knee feels unstable or seems to "give way" when using it.First Aid

See your health care provider if you think you have an ACL injury. Do not play sports or other activities until you have seen a provider and have been treated.Your provider may send you for an MRI of the knee. This can confirm the diagnosis. It may also show other knee injuries.First aid for an ACL injury may include:Raising your leg above the level of the heartPutting ice on the kneePain relievers, such as nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (such as ibuprofen) You also may need:Crutches to walk until the swelling and pain get betterBrace to give your knee some stabilityPhysical therapy to help improve joint motion and leg strengthSurgery to reconstruct the ACL Some people can live and function normally with a torn ACL. However, most people complain that their knee is unstable and may "give out" with physical activity. Unstable knee after ACL tears can lead to further knee damage. You are also less likely to return to the same level of sports without the ACL.DO NOT

Do NOT move your knee if you have had a serious injury.Use a splint to keep the knee straight until you see a doctor.Do NOT return to play or other activities until you have been treated.When to Contact a Medical Professional

Contact your provider right away if you have a serious knee injury.Get immediate medical attention if the foot is cool and blue after a knee injury. This means that the knee joint may be dislocated, and blood vessels to the foot may be injured. This is a medical emergency.Prevention

Use proper techniques when playing sports or exercising. Some college sports programs teach athletes how to reduce stress placed on the ACL. This involves a series of warm up exercises and jumping drills. There are jumping and landing exercises that have been shown to reduce ACL injuries.The use of knee braces during vigorous athletic activity (such as football) is controversial. It has not been shown to reduce the number of knee injuries, but not specifically ACL injuries.Alternative Names

Cruciate ligament injury - anterior; ACL tear; Knee injury - anterior cruciate ligament (ACL)Patient Instructions

ACL reconstruction - discharge 
Images


Knee arthroscopy
ACL degrees
ACL injury
Normal knee anatomy
Anterior cruciate ligament (ACL) injury
Anterior cruciate ligament repair - Series
References

Bolgla LA. Gender issues in ACL injury. In: Giangarra CE, Manske RC, eds. Clinical Orthopaedic Rehabilitation: A Team Approach. 4th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2018:chap 49.Brotzman SB. Anterior cruciate ligament injuries. In: Giangarra CE, Manske RC, eds. Clinical Orthopaedic Rehabilitation: A Team Approach. 4th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2018:chap 47.Cheung EC, McAllister DR, Petrigliano FA. Anterior cruciate ligament injuries. In: Miller MD, Thompson SR, eds. DeLee, Drez, & Miller's Orthopaedic Sports Medicine. 5th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2020:chap 98.Kalawadia JV, Guenther D, Irarrazaval S, Fu FH. Anatomy and biomechanics of the anterior cruciate ligament. In: Prodomos CC. The Anterior Cruciate Ligament: Reconstruction and Basic Science. 2nd ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2018:chap 1.Miller RH, Azar FM. Knee injuries. In: Azar FM, Beaty JH, eds. Campbell's Operative Orthopaedics. 14th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2021:chap 45.
Nyland J, Mattocks A, Kibbe S, Kalloub A, Greene JW, Caborn DN. Anterior cruciate ligament reconstruction, rehabilitation, and return to play: 2015 update. Open Access J Sports Med. 2016;7:21-32. PMID: 26955296 pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/26955296/.
Review Date 6/8/2022


Updated by: C. Benjamin Ma, MD, Professor, Chief, Sports Medicine and Shoulder Service, UCSF Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, San Francisco, CA. Also reviewed by David C. Dugdale, MD, Medical Director, Brenda Conaway, Editorial Director, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.  
Learn how to cite this page
Related MedlinePlus Health Topics

Knee Injuries and Disorders
