source : https://medlineplus.gov/ency/article/003294.htm 
 
 Reflexes are responses that occur when the body receives a certain stimulus. The Babinski reflex occurs after the sole of the foot has been firmly stroked. The big toe then moves upward or toward the top surface of the foot. The other toes fan out.Babinski reflex is one of the normal reflexes in infants and in children up to 2 years old. It disappears as the child gets older. It may disappear as early as 12 months. In adults, this reflex is not normal and often indicates a problem with the brain or spinal cord.Causes

When the Babinski reflex is present in a child older than 2 years or in an adult, it is often a sign of a central nervous system disorder. The central nervous system includes the brain and spinal cord. Disorders may include:Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (Lou Gehrig disease)Brain tumor or injury
 Meningitis (infection of the membranes covering the brain and spinal cord)Viral infection of the brainMultiple sclerosisSpinal cord injury, defect, or tumor
 StrokeNeurodegenerative diseasesAlternative Names

Reflex - Babinski; Extensor plantar reflex; Babinski signReferences

Deluca GC, Griggs RC. Approach to the patient with neurologic disease. In: Goldman L, Schafer AI, eds. Goldman-Cecil Medicine. 26th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2020:chap 368.Mostoufi SA. Cervical radiculopathy. In: Frontera, WR, Silver JK, Rizzo TD Jr, eds. Essentials of Physical Medicine and Rehabilitation. 4th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2019:chap 5.Schor NF. Neurologic evaluation. In: Kliegman RM, St. Geme JW, Blum NJ, Shah SS, Tasker RC, Wilson KM, eds. Nelson Textbook of Pediatrics. 21st ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2020:chap 608.
Review Date 1/23/2023


Updated by: Joseph V. Campellone, MD, Department of Neurology, Cooper Medical School of Rowan University, Camden, NJ. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David C. Dugdale, MD, Medical Director, Brenda Conaway, Editorial Director, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team. 
Learn how to cite this page
Related MedlinePlus Health Topics

Infant and Newborn Care
