source : https://medlineplus.gov/ency/article/002887.htm 
 
 Black nightshade poisoning occurs when someone eats pieces of the black nightshade plant.This article is for information only. DO NOT use it to treat or manage an actual poison exposure. If you or someone you are with has an exposure, call your local emergency number (such as 911), or your local poison control center can be reached directly by calling the national toll-free Poison Help hotline (1-800-222-1222) from anywhere in the United States.Poisonous Ingredient

The poisonous ingredients are:AtropineSolanine (which is very poisonous, even in small amounts) Where Found

Poisons are found in the black nightshade plant, especially in the unripened fruit and leaves.Symptoms

Black nightshade poisoning can affect many areas of the body.EYES, EARS, NOSE, MOUTH, AND THROAT Dry mouthEnlarged (dilated) pupils STOMACH AND INTESTINESDiarrheaStomach painVomiting HEART AND BLOOD Pulse -- slow
   Low blood pressure (shock)LUNGSSlowed breathingNERVOUS SYSTEMDelirium (agitation and confusion)HallucinationsHeadacheLoss of sensationParalysisWHOLE BODYSweating or dry skinElevated body temperature (hyperthermia)Home Care

Seek immediate medical help. DO NOT make a person throw up unless told to do so by poison control or a health care provider.Before Calling Emergency

Get the following information:Person's age, weight, and conditionName and part of the plant that was swallowed, if known Time it was swallowedAmount swallowedPoison Control

Your local poison control center can be reached directly by calling the national toll-free Poison Help hotline (1-800-222-1222) from anywhere in the United States. This national hotline will let you talk to experts in poisoning. They will give you further instructions.This is a free and confidential service. All local poison control centers in the United States use this national number. You should call if you have any questions about poisoning or poison prevention. It does not need to be an emergency. You can call for any reason, 24 hours a day, 7 days a week.What to Expect at the Emergency Room

The provider will measure and monitor the person's vital signs, including temperature, pulse, breathing rate, and blood pressure. Symptoms will be treated as appropriate. The person may receive:Activated charcoalBlood and urine testsBreathing support, including oxygen through a tube through the mouth into the lungs, and a breathing machine (ventilator)Chest x-rayECG (electrocardiogram, or heart tracing)Fluids through a vein (IV)Medicines to treat symptoms and reverse the effects of the poison (antidote)Outlook (Prognosis)

How well you do depends on the amount of poison swallowed and how quickly treatment is received. The faster you get medical help, the better the chance for recovery.Symptoms last for 1 to 3 days and may require a hospital stay. Death is unlikely.DO NOT touch or eat any unfamiliar plant. Wash your hands after working in the garden or walking in the woods.Alternative Names

Nightshade poisoning; Morelle noire poisoning; Wonderberry poisoningReferences

Auerbach PS, Constance BB, Freer L. Toxic plants. In: Auerbach PS, Constance BB, Freer L, eds. Field Guide to Wilderness Medicine. 5th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2019:chap 40.Graeme KA. Toxic plant ingestions. In: Auerbach PS, Cushing TA, Harris NS, eds. Auerbach's Wilderness Medicine. 7th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2017:chap 65.Higgins T. Wild plant and mushroom poisoning. In: Higgins T, ed. Medicine for the Outdoors. 7th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2024:422-430.Kliegman RM, St. Geme JW, Blum NJ, Shah SS, Tasker RC, Wilson KM. Nonbacterial food poisoning. In: Kliegman RM, St. Geme JW, Blum NJ, Shah SS, Tasker RC, Wilson KM, eds. Nelson Textbook of Pediatrics. 21st ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2020:chap 740.
Review Date 11/2/2023


Updated by: Jesse Borke, MD, CPE, FAAEM, FACEP, Attending Physician at Kaiser Permanente, Orange County, CA. Also reviewed by David C. Dugdale, MD, Medical Director, Brenda Conaway, Editorial Director, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.
Learn how to cite this page
Related MedlinePlus Health Topics

Poisoning
