source : https://medlineplus.gov/ency/article/003665.htm 
 
 A blood smear is a blood test that gives information about the number and shape of blood cells. It is often done as part of or along with a complete blood count (CBC).How the Test is Performed

A blood sample is needed. The blood sample is sent to a lab. There, the lab technician looks at it under a microscope. Or, the blood may be examined by an automated machine.The smear provides this information:The number and kinds of white blood cells (differential, or percentage of each type of cell)The number and kinds of abnormally shaped blood cells A rough estimate of white blood cell and platelet countsHow to Prepare for the Test

No special preparation is necessary.How the Test will Feel

When the needle is inserted to draw blood, some people feel moderate pain. Others feel only a prick or stinging. Afterward, there may be some throbbing or a slight bruise. This soon goes away.Why the Test is Performed

This test may be done as part of a general health exam to help diagnose many illnesses. Or, your health care provider may recommend this test if you have signs of:Any known or suspected blood disorderCancerLeukemiaA blood smear may also be done to monitor the side effects of chemotherapy or to help diagnose an infection, such as malaria.Normal Results

Red blood cells (RBCs) normally are the same size and color and are a lighter color in the center. The blood smear is considered normal if there is:Normal appearance of cellsNormal white blood cell differential Normal value ranges may vary slightly among different laboratories. Some labs use different measurements or test different samples. Talk to your provider about the meaning of your specific test results.What Abnormal Results Mean

Abnormal results mean the size, shape, color, or coating of the RBCs is not normal.Some abnormalities may be graded on a 4-point scale:1+ means one quarter of cells are affected2+ means one half of cells are affected3+ means three quarters of cells are affected4+ means all of the cells are affected Presence of cells called target cells may be due to:Abnormal hemoglobin, the protein in RBCs that carries oxygen (hemoglobinopathies)Deficiency of an enzyme called lecithin cholesterol acyltransferaseIron deficiencyLiver diseaseSpleen removal Presence of sphere-shaped cells may be due to:Low number of RBCs due to the body destroying them (immune hemolytic anemia)Low number of RBCs due to some RBCs shaped like spheres (hereditary spherocytosis)Increased breakdown of RBCs Presence of RBCs with an oval shape may be a sign of hereditary elliptocytosis or hereditary ovalocytosis. These are conditions in which RBCs are abnormally shaped.Presence of fragmented cells (also called schistocytes) may be due to:Artificial heart valveBlood disorder that causes blood clots to form in small blood vessels around the body and leads to a low platelet count (thrombotic thrombocytopenic purpura)Disorder in which the proteins that control blood clotting become overactive (disseminated intravascular coagulation)Infection in the digestive system producing toxic substances that destroy RBCs, causing kidney injury (hemolytic uremic syndrome)Presence of a type of immature RBCs called normoblasts may be due to:Blood disorder called erythroblastosis fetalis that affects a fetus or newbornCancer that has spread to bone marrowDisorder in which there is excessive breakdown of hemoglobin (thalassemia)Disorder of the bone marrow in which the marrow is replaced by fibrous scar tissue (myelofibrosis)Removal of spleenSevere breakdown of RBCs (hemolysis)Tuberculosis that has spread from the lungs to other parts of the body through the blood (miliary tuberculosis)The presence of cells called burr cells may indicate:Abnormally high level of nitrogen waste products in the blood (uremia) The presence of cells called spur cells may indicate:Inability to fully absorb dietary fats through the intestines (abetalipoproteinemia)Severe liver disease The presence of teardrop-shaped cells may indicate:Anemia caused by bone marrow not producing normal blood cells due to toxins or tumor cells (myelophthisic process)Cancer in the bone marrowMyelofibrosisSevere iron deficiencyThalassemia majorThe presence of Howell-Jolly bodies (a type of granule inside the red blood cells) may indicate:Bone marrow does not produce enough healthy blood cells (myelodysplasia)Sickle cell anemiaSpleen has been removedThe presence of Heinz bodies (bits of altered hemoglobin) may indicate:Alpha thalassemiaCongenital hemolytic anemiaDisorder in which RBCs break down when the body is exposed to certain medicines or is stressed because of infection (G6PD deficiency)Unstable form of hemoglobin The presence of slightly immature RBCs may indicate:Anemia with bone marrow recoveryHemolytic anemiaHemorrhage The presence of basophilic stippling (a spotted appearance) may indicate:Disorder of the bone marrow in which the marrow is replaced by fibrous scar tissue (myelofibrosis) Lead poisoningThe presence of sickle cells may indicate sickle cell anemia.Risks

There is little risk involved with having your blood taken. Veins and arteries vary in size from one patient to another and from one side of the body to the other. Obtaining a blood sample from some people may be more difficult than from others.Other risks associated with having blood drawn are slight, but may include:Excessive bleedingFainting or feeling lightheadedMultiple punctures to locate veinsHematoma (blood buildup under the skin)Infection (a slight risk any time the skin is broken) Alternative Names

Peripheral smear; Complete blood count - peripheral; CBC - peripheral 
Images


Red blood cells, sickle cell
Red blood cells, tear-drop shape
Red blood cells - normal
Red blood cells - elliptocytosis
Red blood cells - spherocytosis
Acute lymphocytic leukemia - photomicrograph
Red blood cells - multiple sickle cells
Malaria, microscopic view of cellular parasites
Malaria, photomicrograph of cellular parasites
Red blood cells - sickle cells
Red blood cells - sickle and Pappenheimer
Red blood cells, target cells
Formed elements of blood
References

Bain BJ. The peripheral blood smear. In: Goldman L, Schafer AI, eds. Goldman-Cecil Medicine. 26th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2020:chap 148.Kliegman RM, St. Geme JW, Blum NJ, Shah SS, Tasker RC, Wilson KM. Blood disorders. In: Kliegman RM, St. Geme JW, Blum NJ, Shah SS, Tasker RC, Wilson KM, eds. Nelson Textbook of Pediatrics. 21st ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2020:chap 124.Merguerian MD, Gallagher PG. Hereditary elliptocytosis, hereditary pyropoikilocytosis, and related disorders. In: Kliegman RM, St. Geme JW, Blum NJ, Shah SS, Tasker RC, Wilson KM, eds. Nelson Textbook of Pediatrics. 21st ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2020:chap 486.Natelson EA, Chughtai-Harvey I, Rabbi S. Hematology. In: Rakel RE, Rakel DP, eds. Textbook of Family Medicine. 9th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2016:chap 39.Warner EA, Herold AH. Interpreting laboratory tests. In: Rakel RE, Rakel DP, eds. Textbook of Family Medicine. 9th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2016:chap 14.
Review Date 1/9/2022


Updated by: David C. Dugdale, III, MD, Professor of Medicine, Division of General Medicine, Department of Medicine, University of Washington School of Medicine. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Medical Director, Brenda Conaway, Editorial Director, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.  
Learn how to cite this page
Related MedlinePlus Health Topics

Blood Count Tests
Blood Disorders
