source : https://medlineplus.gov/ency/article/001308.htm 
 
 Burkitt lymphoma (BL) is a very fast growing form of non-Hodgkin lymphoma.Causes

BL was first discovered in children in certain parts of Africa. It also occurs in the United States.The African type of BL is closely associated with the Epstein-Barr virus (EBV), the main cause of infectious mononucleosis. The North American form of BL is not commonly linked to EBV. People with HIV/AIDS have an increased risk for this condition. BL is most often seen in males.Symptoms

BL may first be noticed as a swelling of the lymph nodes (glands) in the head and neck. These swollen lymph nodes are often painless, but can grow very rapidly.In the types commonly seen in the United States, the cancer often starts in the belly area (abdomen). The disease can also start in the ovaries, testes, brain, kidneys, liver, and spinal fluid.Other general symptoms may include:
   Fever
   
   Night sweats
   Unexplained weight lossExams and Tests

The health care provider will perform a physical exam. Tests that may be done include:Bone marrow biopsyChest x-rayCT scan of the chest, abdomen, and pelvisComplete blood count (CBC)Examination of the spinal fluidLymph node biopsyPET scanTreatment

Chemotherapy is used to treat this type of cancer. If the cancer does not respond to chemotherapy alone, a bone marrow transplant may be done.Outlook (Prognosis)

More than one half of people with BL can be cured with intensive chemotherapy. The cure rate may be lower if the cancer spreads to the bone marrow or spinal fluid. The outlook is poor if the cancer comes back after a remission or does not go into remission as a result of the first cycle of chemotherapy.Possible Complications

Possible complications of BL include:Complications of treatmentSpread of the cancer When to Contact a Medical Professional

Call your provider if you have symptoms of BL.Alternative Names

B-cell lymphoma; High-grade B-cell lymphoma; Small noncleaved cell lymphoma; Burkitt's lymphomaImages


Lymphatic system
Lymphoma, malignant - CT scan
References

Lewis R, Plowman PN, Shamash J. Malignant disease. In: Feather A, Randall D, Waterhouse M, eds. Kumar and Clarke's Clinical Medicine. 10th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2021:chap 6.National Cancer Institute website. Adult non-Hodgkin lymphoma treatment (PDQ) - health professional version. www.cancer.gov/types/lymphoma/hp/adult-nhl-treatment-pdq#section/all. Updated January 18, 2022. Accessed June 29, 2022.Said JW. Immunodeficiency-related lymphoproliferative disorders. In: Jaffe ES, Arber DA, Campo E, Harris NL, Quintanilla-Martinez L, eds. Hematopathology. 3rd ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2018:chap 10.
Review Date 4/29/2022


Updated by: Todd Gersten, MD, Hematology/Oncology, Florida Cancer Specialists & Research Institute, Wellington, FL. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David C. Dugdale, MD, Medical Director, Brenda Conaway, Editorial Director, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.
Learn how to cite this page
Related MedlinePlus Health Topics

Lymphoma
