source : https://medlineplus.gov/ency/article/003804.htm 
 
 A chest x-ray is an x-ray of the chest, lungs, heart, large arteries, ribs, and diaphragm.How the Test is Performed

You stand in front of the x-ray machine. You will be told to hold your breath when the x-ray is taken.Two images are usually taken. You will first need to stand facing the machine, and then sideways. How to Prepare for the Test

Tell the health care provider if you are pregnant. Chest x-rays are generally not done during pregnancy, and special precautions are taken if they are needed.How the Test will Feel

There is no discomfort. The imaging plate may feel cold.Why the Test is Performed

Your provider may order a chest x-ray if you have any of the following symptoms:A persistent coughChest pain from a chest injury (with a possible rib fracture or lung complication) or from heart problemsCoughing up bloodDifficulty breathingFever It may also be done if you have signs of tuberculosis, lung cancer, or other chest or lung diseases.A serial chest x-ray is one that is repeated. It may be done to monitor changes found on a past chest x-ray.What Abnormal Results Mean

Abnormal results may be due to many things, including:In the lungs:Collapsed lungCollection of fluid around the lungLung tumor (noncancerous or cancerous) 
   Malformation of the blood vessels
   PneumoniaScarring of lung tissueTuberculosis AtelectasisIn the heart:Problems with the size, position or shape of the heartProblems with the position, size and shape of the large arteries Evidence of heart failureIn the bones:Fractures or other problems of the ribs and spineOsteoporosisIn the mediastinum (middle part of the chest):Enlargement, which might be related to infection or tumorRisks

There is low radiation exposure. X-rays are monitored and regulated to provide the minimum amount of radiation exposure needed to produce the image. Most experts feel that the benefits outweigh the risks. Pregnant women and children are more sensitive to the risks of x-rays.Alternative Names

Chest radiography; Serial chest x-ray; X-ray - chestImages


Aortic rupture - chest x-ray
Lung cancer - frontal chest x-ray
Adenocarcinoma - chest x-ray
Coal worker's lungs - chest x-ray
Coccidioidomycosis - chest x-ray
Coal workers pneumoconiosis - stage II
Coal workers pneumoconiosis - stage II
Coal workers pneumoconiosis, complicated
Coal workers pneumoconiosis, complicated
Tuberculosis, advanced - chest x-rays
Pulmonary nodule - front view chest x-ray
Sarcoid, stage II - chest x-ray
Sarcoid, stage IV - chest x-ray
Pulmonary mass - side view chest x-ray
Bronchial cancer - chest x-ray
Lung nodule, right middle lobe - chest x-ray
Lung mass, right upper lung - chest x-ray
Lung nodule - front view chest x-ray
References

Chernecky CC, Berger BJ. Chest radiography (chest x-ray, CXR) - diagnostic norm. In: Chernecky CC, Berger BJ, eds. Laboratory Tests and Diagnostic Procedures. 6th ed. St Louis, MO: Elsevier Saunders; 2013:327-328.Felker GM, Teerlink JR. Diagnosis and management of acute heart failure. In: Libby P, Bonow RO, Mann DL, Tomaselli GF, Bhatt DL, Solomon SD, eds. Braunwald's Heart Disease: A Textbook of Cardiovascular Medicine. 12th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2022:chap 49.Jokerst CE, Gotway MB. Thoracic radiology: noninvasive diagnostic imaging. In: Broaddus VC, Ernst JD, King TE, et al, eds. Murray and Nadel's Textbook of Respiratory Medicine. 7th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2022:chap 20.
Review Date 7/31/2022


Updated by: Denis Hadjiliadis, MD, MHS, Paul F. Harron, Jr. Professor of Medicine, Pulmonary, Allergy, and Critical Care, Perelman School of Medicine, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA. Also reviewed by David C. Dugdale, MD, Medical Director, Brenda Conaway, Editorial Director, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.
Learn how to cite this page
Related MedlinePlus Health Topics

Acute Bronchitis
Bronchial Disorders
Chest Injuries and Disorders
Chronic Bronchitis
Congenital Heart Defects
Cough
Emphysema
Heart Failure
Heart Valve Diseases
Interstitial Lung Diseases
Lung Cancer
Lung Diseases
Pleural Disorders
Pneumococcal Infections
Pneumonia
Pulmonary Embolism
Pulmonary Fibrosis
Sarcoidosis
Tuberculosis
Valley Fever
X-Rays
