source : https://medlineplus.gov/ency/article/001333.htm 
 
 Chiggers are tiny, 6-legged wingless organisms (larvae) that mature to become a type of mite. Chiggers are found in tall grass and weeds. Their bite causes severe itching.Causes

Chiggers are found in certain outdoor areas, such as: Berry patchesTall grass and weedsEdges of woodlands Chiggers bite humans around the waist, ankles, or in warm skin folds. Bites commonly occur in the summer and fall months.Symptoms

The main symptoms of chigger bites are:Severe itching 
 Red pimple-like bumps or hivesItching usually occurs several hours after the chiggers attach to the skin. The bite is painless.A skin rash may appear on the parts of the body that were exposed to the sun. It may stop where the underwear meets the legs. This is often a clue that the rash is due to chigger bites.Exams and Tests

Your health care provider can usually diagnose chiggers by examining the rash. You'll likely be asked about your outdoor activity. A special magnifying scope may be used to find the chiggers on the skin. This helps confirm the diagnosis.Treatment

The goal of treatment is to stop the itching. Antihistamines and corticosteroid creams or lotions may be helpful. Antibiotics are not necessary unless you develop a skin infection.Possible Complications

A secondary infection may occur from scratching.When to Contact a Medical Professional

Contact your provider if the rash itches very badly, or if your symptoms get worse or do not improve with treatment.Prevention

Avoid outdoor areas that you know are contaminated with chiggers. Applying bug spray containing DEET to skin and clothing can help prevent chigger bites. Alternative Names

Harvest mite; Red miteImages


Chigger bite - close-up of blisters
References

Diaz JH. Mites, including chiggers. In: Bennett JE, Dolin R, Blaser MJ, eds. Mandell, Douglas, and Bennett's Principles and Practice of Infectious Diseases. 9th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2020:chap 295.James WD, Elston DM, Treat JR, Rosenbach MA, Neuhaus IM. Parasitic infestations, stings, and bites. In: James WD, Elston DM, Treat JR, Rosenbach MA, Neuhaus IM, eds. Andrews' Diseases of the Skin. 13th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2020:chap 20.
Review Date 12/4/2022


Updated by: Jatin M. Vyas, MD, PhD, Associate Professor in Medicine, Harvard Medical School; Associate in Medicine, Division of Infectious Disease, Department of Medicine, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, MA. Also reviewed by David C. Dugdale, MD, Medical Director, Brenda Conaway, Editorial Director, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.
Learn how to cite this page
