source : https://medlineplus.gov/ency/article/001589.htm 
 
 Cleidocranial dysostosis is a disorder involving the abnormal development of bones in the skull and collar (clavicle) area.Causes

Cleidocranial dysostosis is caused by an abnormal gene. It is passed down through families as an autosomal dominant trait. That means you only need to get the abnormal gene from one parent in order for you to inherit the disease.Cleidocranial dysostosis is a congenital condition, which means it is present from before birth. The condition affects girls and boys equally.Symptoms

People with cleidocranial dysostosis have a jaw and brow area that sticks out. The middle of their nose (nasal bridge) is wide.The collar bones may be missing or abnormally developed. This pushes the shoulders together in front of the body.Primary teeth do not fall out at the expected time. Adult teeth may develop later than normal and an extra set of adult teeth grow in. This causes the teeth to become crooked.Intelligence level is most often normal.Other symptoms include:
 Ability to touch shoulders together in front of bodyDelayed closure of fontanelles ("soft spots")Loose jointsProminent forehead (frontal bossing)Short forearmsShort fingersShort statureIncreased risk of getting flat foot, abnormal curvature of spine (scoliosis) and knee deformitiesHigh risk of hearing loss due to infectionsIncreased risk of fracture due to decreased bone densityExams and Tests

The health care provider will take your family history. The provider will do a physical examination and may do series of x-rays to check for:Undergrowth of the collarbone
  Undergrowth of the shoulder bladeFailure of the area in the front of the pelvis bone to close Treatment

There is no specific treatment for it and management depends on each person's symptoms. Most people with the disease need:Regular dental careHead gear to protect skull bones until they closeEar tubes for frequent ear infectionsSurgery to correct any bone abnormalitiesSupport Groups

More information and support for people with cleidocranial dysostosis and their families can be found at:Little People of America -- www.lpaonline.org/about-lpaFACES: The National Craniofacial Association -- www.faces-cranio.org/Children's Craniofacial Association -- ccakids.org/Outlook (Prognosis)

In most cases, the bone symptoms cause few problems. Appropriate dental care is important.Possible Complications

Complications include dental problems and shoulder dislocations.When to Contact a Medical Professional

Call your provider if you have a:Family history of cleidocranial dysostosis and are planning to have a child.Child with similar symptoms.Prevention

Genetic counseling is appropriate if a person with a family or personal history of cleidocranial dysostosis is planning to have children. The disease may be diagnosed during pregnancy.Alternative Names

Cleidocranial dysplasia; Dento-osseous dysplasia; Marie-Sainton syndrome; CLCD; Dysplasia cleidocranial; Osteodental dysplasiaReferences

Hecht JT, Horton WA, Rodriguez-Buritica D. Disorders involving transcription factors. In: Kliegman RM, St. Geme JW, Blum NJ, Shah SS, Tasker RC, Wilson KM, eds. Nelson Textbook of Pediatrics. 21st ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2020:chap 718.Lissauer T, Carroll W. Musculoskeletal disorders. In: Lissauer T, Carroll W, eds. Illustrated Textbook of Paediatrics. 6th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2022:chap 28.National Center for Advancing Translational Sciences. Genetic and Rare Diseases Information Center. Cleidocranial dysplasia. rarediseases.info.nih.gov/diseases/6118/cleidocranial-dysplasia. Updated August 19, 2020. Accessed April 14, 2022.National Institute of Health website. Genetics Home Reference. Cleidocranial dysplasia. ghr.nlm.nih.gov/condition/cleidocranial-dysplasia#sourcesforpage. Updated January 7, 2020. Accessed April 14, 2022.
Review Date 2/24/2022


Updated by: Neil K. Kaneshiro, MD, MHA, Clinical Professor of Pediatrics, University of Washington School of Medicine, Seattle, WA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Medical Director, Brenda Conaway, Editorial Director, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.
Learn how to cite this page
Related MedlinePlus Health Topics

Craniofacial Abnormalities
