source : https://medlineplus.gov/ency/article/001017.htm 
 
 Corneal injury is a wound to the part of the eye known as the cornea. The cornea is the crystal clear (transparent) tissue that covers the front of the eye. It works with the lens of the eye to focus images on the retina.Causes

Injuries to the cornea are common.Injuries to the outer surface may be due to: 
 Abrasions -- Includes scratches or scrapes on the surface of the cornea 
 Chemical injuries -- Caused by almost any fluid that gets into the eye 
 Contact lens problems -- Overuse, poor fit, or sensitivity to contact lens care solutions 
 Foreign bodies -- Exposure to something in the eye such as sand or dust 
 Ultraviolet injuries -- Caused by sunlight, sun lamps, snow or water reflections, or arc-welding Infections may also damage the cornea.You are more likely to develop a corneal injury if you:Are exposed to sunlight or artificial ultraviolet light for long periods of timeHave ill-fitting contact lenses or overuse your contact lensesHave very dry eyesWork in a dusty environmentUse a hammer or power tools without wearing safety glasses High-speed particles, such as chips from hammering metal on metal, may get stuck in the surface of the cornea. Rarely, they may penetrate deeper into the eye.Watch this video about:Corneal injurySymptoms

Symptoms include:Blurred visionEye pain or stinging and burning in the eyeFeeling like something is in your eye (may be caused by a scratch or something in your eye)Light sensitivityRedness of the eyeSwollen eyelidsWatery eyes or increased tearing Exams and Tests

You will need to have a complete eye test. The health care provider may use eye drops containing fluorescein dye to help look for injuries.Tests may include: Standard eye examSlit lamp examinationTreatment

First aid for eye emergencies:Do not try to remove an object that is stuck in your eye without professional medical help.If chemicals are splashed in the eye, immediately flush the eye with water for 15 minutes. The person should be quickly taken to the nearest emergency room. Anyone with severe eye pain needs to be seen in an emergency care center or examined by an ophthalmologist right away.Treatment for corneal injuries may involve:Removing foreign material from the eyeWearing an eye patch or temporary bandage contact lensUsing eye drops or ointments prescribed by the doctorNot wearing contact lenses until the eye has healedTaking pain medicines Outlook (Prognosis)

Most of the time, injuries that affect only the surface of the cornea heal very quickly with treatment. The eye should be back to normal within 2 days. For more serious injuries or when there may be delayed healing, placement of an amniotic membrane (from purified placental tissue) can be very helpful.Injuries that penetrate the cornea are much more serious. The outcome depends on the specific injury.When to Contact a Medical Professional

Contact your provider if the injury is not better after 2 days of treatment.Prevention

Things you can do to prevent corneal injuries include:Wear safety goggles at all times when using hand or power tools or chemicals, during high impact sports, or during other activities where you may get an eye injury.Wear sunglasses that screen ultraviolet light when you are exposed to sunlight or are in the vicinity of arc welding. Wear this type of sunglasses even during the winter.Be careful when using household cleaners. Many household products contain strong chemicals. Drain and oven cleaners are very dangerous. They can lead to blindness if not used properly. Alternative Names

Abrasion - corneal; Scratch - corneal; Eye pain - cornealImages


Cornea
References

Dang DH, Riaz KM, Karamichos D. Treatment of non-infectious corneal injury: review of diagnostic agents, therapeutic medications, and future targets. Drugs. 2022;82(2):145-167. PMID: 35025078 pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/35025078/.Fowler GC. Corneal abrasions and removal of corneal or conjunctival foreign bodies. In: Fowler GC, ed. Pfenninger and Fowler's Procedures for Primary Care. 4th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2020:chap 200.Guluma K, Lee JE. Ophthalmology. In: Walls RM, eds. Rosen's Emergency Medicine: Concepts and Clinical Practice. 10th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2023:chap 57.Knoop KJ, Dennis WR. Ophthalmologic procedures. In: Roberts JR, Custalow CB, Thomsen TW, eds. Roberts and Hedges' Clinical Procedures in Emergency Medicine and Acute Care. 7th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2019:chap 62.Rao NK, Goldstein MH. Acid and alkali burns. In: Yanoff M, Duker JS, eds. Ophthalmology. 4th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2019:chap 4.26.
Review Date 8/22/2022


Updated by: Franklin W. Lusby, MD, Ophthalmologist, Lusby Vision Institute, La Jolla, CA. Also reviewed by David C. Dugdale, MD, Medical Director, Brenda Conaway, Editorial Director, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.
Learn how to cite this page
Related MedlinePlus Health Topics

Corneal Disorders
Eye Injuries
