source : https://medlineplus.gov/ency/article/000627.htm 
 
 Cysticercosis is an infection by a parasite called Taenia solium (T solium). It is a pork tapeworm that creates cysts in different areas in the body.Causes

Cysticercosis is caused by swallowing eggs from T solium. The eggs are found in contaminated food. Autoinfection is when a person who is already infected with adult T solium swallows its eggs. This occurs due to improper hand washing after a bowel movement (fecal-oral transmission).Risk factors include eating pork, fruits, and vegetables contaminated with T solium as a result of undercooking or improper food preparation. The disease can also be spread by contact with infected feces.The disease is rare in the United States. It is common in many developing countries.Symptoms

Most often, the worms stay in muscles and do not cause symptoms.Symptoms occur depending on where the infection is found in the body:Brain -- seizures or symptoms similar to those of a brain tumorEyes -- decreased vision or blindnessHeart -- abnormal heart rhythms or heart failure (rare)Spine -- weakness or changes in walking due to damage to nerves in the spineExams and Tests

Tests that may be done include:Blood tests to detect antibodies to the parasiteBiopsy of the affected area
   CT scan, MRI scan, or x-rays to detect the lesionSpinal tap (lumbar puncture)Test in which an ophthalmologist looks inside the eyeTreatment

Treatment may involve:Medicines to kill the parasites, such as albendazole or praziquantelPowerful anti-inflammatories (steroids) to reduce swellingIf the cyst is in the eye or brain, steroids should be started a few days before other medicines to avoid problems caused by swelling during antiparasitic treatment. Not all people benefit from antiparasitic treatment.Sometimes, surgery may be needed to remove the infected area.Outlook (Prognosis)

The outlook is good, unless the lesion has caused blindness, heart failure, or brain damage. These are rare complications.Possible Complications

Complications may include:Blindness, decreased visionHeart failure or abnormal heart rhythmHydrocephalus (fluid buildup in part of the brain, often with increased pressure)SeizuresWhen to Contact a Medical Professional

If you have any symptoms of cysticercosis, contact your health care provider.Prevention

Avoid unwashed foods, do not eat uncooked foods while traveling, and always wash fruits and vegetables well.Images


Digestive system organs
References

White AC, Brunetti E. Cestodes. In: Goldman L, Schafer AI, eds. Goldman-Cecil Medicine. 26th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2020:chap 333.White AC, Fischer PR. Cysticercosis. In: Kliegman RM, St. Geme JW, Blum NJ, Shah SS, Tasker RC, Wilson KM, eds. Nelson Textbook of Pediatrics. 21st ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2020:chap 329.
Review Date 11/23/2021


Updated by: Jatin M. Vyas, MD, PhD, Associate Professor in Medicine, Harvard Medical School; Associate in Medicine, Division of Infectious Disease, Department of Medicine, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, MA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Medical Director, Brenda Conaway, Editorial Director, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.
Learn how to cite this page
Related MedlinePlus Health Topics

Parasitic Diseases
