source : https://medlineplus.gov/ency/article/001915.htm 
 
 The information below is from the US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC).Accidents (unintentional injuries) are, by far, the leading cause of death among children and teens.THE TOP THREE CAUSES OF DEATH BY AGE GROUP0 to 1 year:Developmental and genetic conditions that were present at birthConditions due to premature birth (short gestation)Accidents (unintentional injuries)1 to 4 years:Accidents (unintentional injuries)Developmental and genetic conditions that were present at birthHomicide 5 to 9 years:Accidents (unintentional injuries)CancerDevelopmental and genetic conditions that were present at birth10 to 14 yearsAccidents (unintentional injuries)Suicide (intentional self-harm)CancerCONDITIONS PRESENT AT BIRTHSome birth defects cannot be prevented. Other problems may be diagnosed during pregnancy. These conditions, when recognized, may be prevented or treated while the baby is still in the womb or right after birth.Tests that may be done before or during pregnancy include: AmniocentesisChorionic villus samplingFetal ultrasoundGenetic screening of the parentsMedical histories and childbirth history of the parentsPREMATURITY AND LOW BIRTH WEIGHTDeath due to prematurity often results from a lack of prenatal care. If you are pregnant and are not receiving prenatal care, call your health care provider or local department of health. Most state health departments have programs that provide prenatal care to mothers, even if they do not have insurance and are not able to pay.All sexually active and pregnant teens and women should be educated about the importance of prenatal care.SUICIDEIt is important to watch teens for signs of stress, depression, and suicidal behavior. Open communication between the teen and parents or other people of trust is very important for preventing teen suicide.If you or someone you know is thinking about suicide, call or text 988 or chat 988lifeline.org. You can also call 1-800-273-8255 (1-800-273-TALK). The 988 Suicide and Crisis Lifeline provides free and confidential support 24/7, anytime day or night.You can also call 911 or the local emergency number or go to the hospital emergency room. DO NOT delay.HOMICIDEHomicide is a complex issue that does not have a simple answer. Prevention requires an understanding of the root causes and a willingness of the public to change those causes.AUTO ACCIDENTSThe automobile accounts for the largest number of accidental deaths. All infants and children should use the proper child car seats, booster seats, and seat belts.Other top causes of accidental death are drowning, fire, falls, and poisoning.Alternative Names

Childhood and adolescent causes of deathReferences

Centers for Disease Control and Prevention website. Child health. www.cdc.gov/nchs/fastats/child-health.htm. Updated January 18, 2023. Accessed February 21, 2023.Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Deaths: final data for 2019. National vital statistics reports. Vol. 70, Number 8. www.cdc.gov/nchs/data/nvsr/nvsr70/nvsr70-08-508.pdf. Updated July 26, 2021. Accessed November 24, 2022.
Review Date 7/28/2022


Updated by: Charles I. Schwartz MD, FAAP, Clinical Assistant Professor of Pediatrics, Perelman School of Medicine at the University of Pennsylvania, General Pediatrician at PennCare for Kids, Phoenixville, PA. Also reviewed by David C. Dugdale, MD, Medical Director, Brenda Conaway, Editorial Director, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team. Editorial update 02/21/2023.
Learn how to cite this page
Related MedlinePlus Health Topics

Health Statistics
