source : https://medlineplus.gov/ency/article/001406.htm 
 
 Developmental reading disorder is a reading disability that occurs when the brain does not properly recognize and process certain symbols.It is also called dyslexia. Causes

Developmental reading disorder (DRD) or dyslexia occurs when there is a problem in areas of the brain that help interpret language. It is not caused by vision problems. The disorder is an information processing problem. It does not interfere with thinking ability. Most people with DRD have normal or above-average intelligence. DRD may appear with other problems. These can include developmental writing disorder and developmental arithmetic disorder.The condition often runs in families.Symptoms

A person with DRD may have trouble rhyming and separating sounds that make up spoken words. These abilities affect learning to read. A child's early reading skills are based on word recognition. That involves being able to separate out the sounds in words and match them with letters and groups of letters.People with DRD have trouble connecting the sounds of language to the letters of words. This may also create problems in understanding sentences.True dyslexia is much broader than simply confusing or transposing letters. For example, mistaking a "b" and a "d."In general, symptoms of DRD may include problems with:Determining the meaning of a simple sentenceLearning to recognize written wordsRhyming wordsExams and Tests

It is important for a health care provider to rule out other causes of learning and reading disabilities, such as:Emotional disordersIntellectual disabilityBrain diseasesCertain cultural and education factors Before diagnosing DRD, the provider will:Perform a complete medical exam, including a neurological exam.Ask questions about the person's developmental, social, and school performance.Ask if anyone else in the family has had dyslexia. Psychoeducational testing and psychological assessment may be done.Treatment

A different approach is needed for each person with DRD. An individual education plan should be considered for each child with the condition.The following may be recommended:Extra learning assistance, called remedial instructionPrivate, individual tutoringSpecial day classes Positive reinforcement is important. Many students with learning disabilities have poor self-esteem. Psychological counseling may be helpful.Outlook (Prognosis)

Specialized help (called remedial instruction) can help improve reading and comprehension.Possible Complications

DRD may lead to:Problems in school, including behavior problemsLoss of self-esteemReading problems that continueProblems with job performance When to Contact a Medical Professional 

Contact your provider if your child appears to be having trouble learning to read.Prevention

Learning disorders tend to run in families. It is important to notice and recognize the warning signs. The earlier the disorder is discovered, the better the outcome. Alternative Names

DyslexiaReferences

Grajo LC, Guzman J, Szklut SE, Philibert DB. Learning disabilities and developmental coordination disorder. In: Lazaro RT, Reina-Guerra SG, Quiben MU, eds. Umphred's Neurological Rehabilitation. 7th ed. St Louis, MO: Elsevier; 2020:chap 12.Kelly DP, Natale MJ. Neurodevelopmental and executive function and dysfunction. In: Kliegman RM, St. Geme JW, Blum NJ, Shah SS, Tasker RC, Wilson KM, eds. Nelson Textbook of Pediatrics. 21st ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2020:chap 48.Lawton AW, Wang MY. Lesions of retrochiasmal pathways, higher cortical function, and nonorganic visual loss. In: Yanoff M, Duker JS, eds. Ophthalmology. 6th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2023:chap 9.13.Sidhu R, O'Banion DD, Hall C. Autism and other neurodevelopmental disabilities. In: Jankovic J, Mazziotta JC, Pomeroy SL, Newman NJ, eds. Bradley and Daroff's Neurology in Clinical Practice. 8th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2022:chap 90.
Review Date 1/24/2023


Updated by: Neil K. Kaneshiro, MD, MHA, Clinical Professor of Pediatrics, University of Washington School of Medicine, Seattle, WA. Also reviewed by David C. Dugdale, MD, Medical Director, Brenda Conaway, Editorial Director, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.  
Learn how to cite this page
Related MedlinePlus Health Topics

Learning Disabilities
