source : https://medlineplus.gov/ency/article/002006.htm 
 
 This article describes the skills and growth targets of 2-month-old infants.Information

Physical and motor-skill markers:Closing of soft spot at the back of the head (posterior fontanelle)Several newborn reflexes, such as the stepping reflex (baby appears to dance or step when placed upright on solid surface) and grasp reflex (grasping a finger), disappearLess head lag (head is less wobbly on the neck)When on stomach, able to lift head almost 45 degreesLess flexing of the arms and legs while lying on the stomach Sensory and cognitive markers:Beginning to look at close objects.Coos.Different cries mean different things.Head turns from side to side with sound at the level of the ear.Smiles.Responds to familiar voices.Healthy babies can cry up to 3 hours per day. If you are worried that your baby cries too much, talk to your health care provider. Play recommendations:Expose your baby to sounds outside those of the home.Take your baby for rides in the car or walks in the neighborhood.The room should be bright with pictures and mirrors.Toys and objects should be bright colors.Read to your baby.Talk to your baby about objects and people in their environment.Hold and comfort your baby if they are upset or crying. DO NOT worry about spoiling your 2-month-old. Alternative Names

Normal childhood growth milestones - 2 months; Childhood growth milestones - 2 months; Growth milestones for children - 2 monthsImages


Developmental milestones
References

Centers for Disease Control and Prevention website. Infants (0-1 year of age). www.cdc.gov/ncbddd/childdevelopment/positiveparenting/infants.html. Updated November 29, 2021. Accessed February 13, 2023.Onigbanjo MT, Feigelman S. The first year. In: Kliegman RM, St. Geme JW, Blum NJ, Shah SS, Tasker RC, Wilson KM, eds. Nelson Textbook of Pediatrics. 21st ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2020:chap 22.
Review Date 1/24/2023


Updated by: Neil K. Kaneshiro, MD, MHA, Clinical Professor of Pediatrics, University of Washington School of Medicine, Seattle, WA. Also reviewed by David C. Dugdale, MD, Medical Director, Brenda Conaway, Editorial Director, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.  
Learn how to cite this page
Related MedlinePlus Health Topics

Infant and Newborn Development
