source : https://medlineplus.gov/ency/article/000310.htm 
 
 Drug-induced low blood sugar is low blood glucose that results from taking medicine.Causes

Low blood sugar (hypoglycemia) is common in people with diabetes who are taking insulin or other medicines to control their diabetes.Other than certain medicines, the following can also cause blood sugar (glucose) level to drop:Drinking alcoholGetting more activity than usualIntentionally or unintentionally overdosing on the medicines used to treat diabetesMissing meals Even when diabetes is managed very carefully, the medicines used to treat diabetes can result in drug-induced low blood sugar. The condition may also occur when someone without diabetes takes a medicine used to treat diabetes. In rare cases, non-diabetes-related medicines can cause low blood sugar.Medicines that can cause drug-induced low blood sugar include:Beta-blockers (such as atenolol, or propranolol overdose)Cibenzoline and quinidine (heart arrhythmia drugs)Glinides (such as nateglinide and repaglinide)Indomethacin (a pain reliever)InsulinMetformin when used with sulfonylureasSGLT2 inhibitors (such as canagliflozin, dapagliflozin, empagliflozin and ertugliflozin) with or without sulfonylureasSulfonylureas (such as glipizide, glimepiride, glyburide)Thiazolidinediones (such as pioglitazone and rosiglitazone) when used with sulfonylureasDrugs that fight infections (such as gatifloxacin, levofloxacin, pentamidine, quinine, trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole)Alternative Names

Hypoglycemia - drug-induced; Low blood glucose - drug-inducedImages


Food and insulin release
References

Cieslak J, Levin A, Beaulieu M. Management of patients with diabetes in the intensive care unit. In: Ronco C, Bellomo R, Kellum JA, Ricci Z, eds. Critical Care Nephrology. 3rd ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2019:chap 215.Holt RIG. Diabetes mellitus. In: Feather A, Randall D, Waterhouse M, eds. Kumar and Clarke's Clinical Medicine. 10th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2021:chap 23.
Review Date 10/25/2022


Updated by: Frank D. Brodkey, MD, FCCM, Associate Professor, Section of Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine, University of Wisconsin School of Medicine and Public Health, Madison, WI. Also reviewed by David C. Dugdale, MD, Medical Director, Brenda Conaway, Editorial Director, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.
Learn how to cite this page
Related MedlinePlus Health Topics

Hypoglycemia
