source : https://medlineplus.gov/ency/article/000447.htm 
 
 Eosinophilic fasciitis (EF) is a syndrome in which tissue under the skin and over the muscle, called fascia, becomes swollen, inflamed and thick. The skin on the arms, legs, neck, abdomen or feet can swell quickly. The condition is very rare.EF may look similar to scleroderma, but is not related. Unlike scleroderma, in EF, the fingers are not involved. Causes

The cause of EF is unknown. Rare cases have occurred after taking L-tryptophan supplements. In people with this condition, white blood cells, called eosinophils, build up in the muscles and tissues. Eosinophils are linked to allergic reactions. The syndrome is more common in people ages 30 to 60.Symptoms

Symptoms may include:Tenderness and swelling of the skin on the arms, legs, or sometimes the joints (most often on both sides of the body)ArthritisCarpal tunnel syndromeMuscle painThickened skin that looks puckered Exams and Tests

Tests that may be done include:CBC with differentialGamma globulins (a type of immune system protein)Erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) and C-reactive protein (CRP)MRIMuscle biopsySkin biopsy (the biopsy needs to include the deep tissue of the fascia)Treatment

Corticosteroids and other immune-suppressing medicines are used to relieve symptoms. These medicines are more effective when started early in the disease. Nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) may also help reduce symptoms.Outlook (Prognosis)

In most cases, the condition goes away within 1 to 3 years. However, symptoms may last longer or come back. Possible Complications

Arthritis is a rare complication of EF. Some people may develop serious blood disorders or blood-related cancers, such as aplastic anemia or leukemia. The outlook is much worse if blood diseases occur.When to Contact a Medical Professional

Contact your health care provider if you have symptoms of this disorder.Prevention

There is no known prevention.Alternative Names

Shulman syndromeReferences

Aronson JK. Tryptophan. In: Aronson JK, ed. Meyler's Side Effects of Drugs. 16th ed. Waltham, MA: Elsevier B.V.; 2016:220-221.Florentino DF, Werth VP. Skin and rheumatic diseases. In: Firestein GS, Budd RC, Gabriel SE, Koretzky GA, McInnes IB, O'Dell JR, eds. Firestein & Kelley's Textbook of Rheumatology. 11th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2021:chap 46.James WD, Elston DM, Treat JR, Rosenbach MA, Neuhaus IM. Connective tissue diseases. In: James WD, Elston DM, Treat JR, Rosenbach MA, Neuhaus IM, eds. Andrews' Diseases of the Skin: Clinical Dermatology. 13th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2020:chap 8.National Organization for Rare Disorders. Eosinophilic fasciitis. rarediseases.org/rare-diseases/eosinophilic-fasciitis/. Updated 2016. Accessed March 3, 2023.Pinal-Fernandez I, Selva-O' Callaghan A, Grau JM. Diagnosis and classification of eosinophilic fasciitis. Autoimmun Rev. 2014;13(4-5):379-382. PMID: 24424187 pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/24424187/.
Review Date 1/25/2023


Updated by: Neil J. Gonter, MD, Assistant Professor of Medicine, Columbia University, NY and private practice specializing in Rheumatology at Rheumatology Associates of North Jersey, Teaneck, NJ. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David C. Dugdale, MD, Medical Director, Brenda Conaway, Editorial Director, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.   
Learn how to cite this page
Related MedlinePlus Health Topics

Eosinophilic Disorders
