source : https://medlineplus.gov/ency/article/000632.htm 
 
 Erysipeloid is a rare and acute infection of the skin caused by bacteria.Causes

The bacteria that cause erysipeloid are called Erysipelothrix rhusiopathiae. This type of bacteria may be found in fish, birds, mammals, and shellfish. Erysipeloid usually affects people who work with these animals (such as farmers, butchers, cooks, grocers, fishermen, or veterinarians). Infection results when the bacteria enters the skin through small breaks.Symptoms

Symptoms may develop in 2 to 7 days after bacteria enter the skin. Usually, the fingers and hands are affected. But any exposed area of the body can get infected if there is a break in the skin. Symptoms may include:Bright red skin in the infected areaSwelling of the areaThrobbing pain with itching or burning sensationFluid-filled blistersLow fever if the infection spreads Swollen lymph nodes (sometimes)The infection may spread to other fingers. It usually doesn't spread past the wrist.Exams and Tests

The health care provider will examine you. The provider can often make the diagnosis by looking at the infected skin and by asking how your symptoms started.Tests that may be done to confirm the diagnosis include:Skin biopsy and culture to check for the bacteriaBlood tests to check for bacteria if the infection has spreadTreatment

Antibiotics, especially penicillin, are very effective to treat this condition.Outlook (Prognosis)

Erysipeloid may get better on its own. It rarely spreads. If it does spread, the lining of the heart can become infected. This condition is called endocarditis. Prevention

Using gloves while handling or preparing fish or meat can prevent the infection.Alternative Names

Erysipelothricosis - erysipeloid; Skin infection - erysipeloid; Cellulitis - erysipeloid; Erysipeloid of Rosenbach; Diamond skin disease; ErysipelasReferences

Dinulos JGH. Bacterial infections. In: Dinulos JGH, ed. Habif's Clinical Dermatology. 7th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2021:chap 9.Kliegman RM, St. Geme JW, Blum NJ, Shah SS, Tasker RC, Wilson KM. Cutaneous bacterial infections. In: Kliegman RM, St. Geme JW, Blum NJ, Shah SS, Tasker RC, Wilson KM, eds. Nelson Textbook of Pediatrics. 21st ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2020:chap 685.Puar N, Nopper AJ. Superficial bacterial skin infections and cellulitis. In: Long SS, ed. Principles and Practice of Pediatric Infectious Diseases. 6th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2023:chap 67.Sommer LL, Reboli AC, Heymann WR. Bacterial diseases. In: Bolognia JL, Schaffer JV, Cerroni L, eds. Dermatology. 4th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2018:chap 74.
Review Date 11/18/2022


Updated by: Elika Hoss, MD, Assistant Professor of Dermatology, Mayo Clinic, Scottsdale, AZ. Also reviewed by David C. Dugdale, MD, Medical Director, Brenda Conaway, Editorial Director, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.
Learn how to cite this page
Related MedlinePlus Health Topics

Bacterial Infections
Rashes
