source : https://medlineplus.gov/ency/article/002937.htm 
 
 A gastrostomy feeding tube insertion is the placement of a feeding tube through the skin and the stomach wall. It goes directly into the stomach.Description

Gastrostomy feeding tube (G-tube) insertion is done in part using a procedure called endoscopy. This is a way of looking inside the body using a flexible tube with a small camera on the end of it. The endoscope is inserted through the mouth and down the esophagus, which leads to the stomach.After the endoscopy tube is inserted, the skin over the left side of belly (abdomen) area is cleaned and numbed. The doctor makes a small surgical cut in this area. The G-tube is inserted through this cut into the stomach. The tube is small, flexible, and hollow. The doctor uses stitches to close the stomach around the tube.Why the Procedure is Performed

Gastrostomy feeding tubes are put in for different reasons. They may be needed for a short time or permanently. This procedure may be used for:Babies with birth defects of the mouth, esophagus, or stomach (for example, esophageal atresia or tracheal esophageal fistula)People who cannot swallow correctlyPeople who cannot take enough food by mouth to stay healthyPeople who often breathe in food when eating Risks

Risks for surgical or endoscopic feeding tube insertion are: BleedingInfection Before the Procedure

You will be given a sedative and a painkiller. In most cases, these medicines are given through a vein (IV line) in your arm. You should feel no pain and not remember the procedure.A numbing medicine may be sprayed into your mouth to prevent the urge to cough or gag when the endoscope is inserted. A mouth guard will be inserted to protect your teeth and the endoscope.Dentures must be removed.After the Procedure

This is most often a simple surgery with a good outlook. Follow any self-care instructions you're given, including:How to care for the skin around the tubeSigns and symptoms of infectionWhat to do if the tube is pulled outSigns and symptoms of tube blockageHow to empty the stomach through the tubeHow and what to feed through the tubeHow to hide the tube under clothingWhat normal activities can be continuedOutlook (Prognosis)

The stomach and abdomen will heal in 5 to 7 days. Moderate pain can be treated with medicine. Feedings will start slowly with clear liquids, and increase slowly.Alternative Names

Gastrostomy tube insertion; G-tube insertion; PEG tube insertion; Stomach tube insertion; Percutaneous endoscopic gastrostomy tube insertionImages


Gastrostomy tube placement  - series
References

Kessel D, Robertson I. Treating gastrointestinal conditions. In: Kessel D, Robertson I, eds. Interventional Radiology: A Survival Guide. 4th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2017:chap 42.Murray TE, Lee MJ. Gastrostomy and jejunostomy. In: Mauro MA, Murphy KP, Thomson KR, Venbrux AC, Morgan RA, eds. Image-Guided Interventions. 3rd ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2021:chap 91.Twyman SL, Davis PW. Percutaneous endoscopic gastrostomy placement and replacement. In: Fowler GC, ed. Pfenninger and Fowler's Procedures for Primary Care. 4th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2020:chap 92.
Review Date 4/20/2022


Updated by: Debra G. Wechter, MD, FACS, General Surgery Practice Specializing in Breast Cancer, Virginia Mason Medical Center, Seattle, WA. Also reviewed by David C. Dugdale, MD, Medical Director, Brenda Conaway, Editorial Director, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.
Learn how to cite this page
Related MedlinePlus Health Topics

Nutritional Support
