source : https://medlineplus.gov/ency/article/000837.htm 
 
 Hereditary hemorrhagic telangiectasia (HHT) is an inherited disorder of the blood vessels that can cause excessive bleeding.Causes

HHT is passed down through families in an autosomal dominant pattern. This means the abnormal gene is needed from only one parent in order to inherit the disease.Scientists have identified four genes involved in this condition. All of these genes appear to be important for blood vessels to develop properly. A mutation in any one of these genes is responsible for HHT.Symptoms

People with HHT can develop abnormal blood vessels in several areas of the body. These vessels are called arteriovenous malformations (AVMs).If they are on the skin, they are called telangiectasias. The most common sites include the lips, tongue, ears, and fingers. The abnormal blood vessels can also develop in the brain, lungs, liver, intestines, or other areas.Symptoms of this syndrome include:Frequent nosebleeds in childrenBleeding in the gastrointestinal tract (GI), including loss of blood in the stool, or dark or black stoolsSeizures or unexplained, small strokes (from bleeding into the brain)Shortness of breathEnlarged liverHeart failureAnemia caused by low ironExams and Tests

Your health care provider will perform a physical examination and ask about your symptoms. An experienced provider can detect telangiectases during a physical examination. There is often a family history of this condition.Tests include:Blood gas testsBlood testsImaging test of the heart called an echocardiogramEndoscopy, which uses a tiny camera attached to a thin tube to look inside your bodyMRI to detect AVMs in the brainCT or ultrasound scans to detect AVMs in the liver Genetic testing is available to look for changes in genes associated with this syndrome.Treatment

Treatments may include:Surgery to treat bleeding in some areasElectrocautery (heating tissue with electricity) or laser surgery to treat frequent or heavy nosebleedsEndovascular embolization (injecting a substance through a thin tube) to treat abnormal blood vessels in the brain and other parts of the body Some people respond to estrogen therapy, which can reduce bleeding episodes. Iron may also be given if there is a lot of blood loss, leading to anemia. Avoid taking blood-thinning medicines. Some medicines that affect blood vessel development are being studied as possible future treatments. Some people may need to take antibiotics before having dental work or surgery. People with lung AVMs should avoid scuba diving to prevent decompression sickness (the bends). Ask your provider what other precautions you should take.Support Groups

More information and support for people with HHT disorder and their families can be found at:Cure HHT -- curehht.org/National Organization for Rare Disorders -- rarediseases.org/rare-diseases/hereditary-hemorrhagic-telangiectasia/Outlook (Prognosis)

People with this syndrome can live a completely normal lifespan, depending on where in the body the AVMs are located.Possible Complications

These complications can occur:Heart failureHigh blood pressure in the lungs (pulmonary hypertension)Internal bleedingShortness of breath StrokeWhen to Contact a Medical Professional

Contact your provider if you or your child has frequent nose bleeds or other signs of this disease.Prevention

Genetic counseling is recommended for couples who want to have children and who have a family history of HHT. If you have this condition, medical treatments can prevent certain types of strokes and heart failure.Alternative Names

HHT; Osler-Weber-Rendu syndrome; Osler-Weber-Rendu disease; Rendu-Osler-Weber syndromeImages


Circulatory system
Arteries of the brain
References

Centers for Disease Control and Prevention website. Blood disorders: facts about hereditary hemorrhagic telangiectasia (HHT). www.cdc.gov/ncbddd/hht/. Updated April 28, 2023. Accessed May 1, 2023.Cappell MS, Lebwohl O. Hereditary hemorrhagic telangiectasia. In: Lebwohl MG, Heymann WR, Coulson IH, Murrell DF, eds. Treatment of Skin Disease. 6th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2022:chap 102.Kwah J, Brandt LJ. Vascular lesions of the gastrointestinal tract. In: Feldman M, Friedman LS, Brandt LJ, eds. Sleisenger and Fordtran's Gastrointestinal and Liver Disease. 11th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2021:chap 38.McDonald J, Pyeritz RE. Hereditary hemorrhagic telangiectasia. In: Adam MP, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, et al, eds. GeneReviews [Internet]. Seattle, WA: University of Washington, Seattle; 1993-2023. www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK1351/. Updated November 24, 2021. Accessed May 1, 2023.
Review Date 4/24/2023


Updated by: Anna C. Edens Hurst, MD, MS, Associate Professor in Medical Genetics, The University of Alabama at Birmingham, Birmingham, AL. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David C. Dugdale, MD, Medical Director, Brenda Conaway, Editorial Director, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.   
Learn how to cite this page
Related MedlinePlus Health Topics

Arteriovenous Malformations
Bleeding Disorders
