source : https://medlineplus.gov/ency/article/003223.htm 
 
 Intertrigo is inflammation of the skin folds. It tends to occur in warm, moist areas of the body where two skin surfaces rub or press against each other. Such areas are called intertriginous areas.Causes

Intertrigo affects the top layers of skin. It is caused by moisture, bacteria, or fungus in the folds of the skin. Bright red, well-defined weeping patches and plaques are seen in the folds of the neck, armpits, elbow pits, groin, finger and toe webs, or backs of the knees. If the skin is very moist, it may begin to break down. In severe cases, there may be a bad odor.The condition is most common in people who are obese. It may also occur in people who must stay in bed or who wear medical devices such as artificial limbs, splints, and braces. These devices may trap moisture against the skin.Intertrigo is common in warm, moist climates.Home Care

It may help to lose weight and change your body position often.Other things you can do are:Separate skin folds with dry towels.Blow a fan on moist areas.Wear loose clothing and moisture-wicking fabrics. When to Contact a Medical Professional

Contact your health care provider if:The condition does not go away, even with good home care.The area of affected skin spreads beyond a skin fold.What to Expect at Your Office Visit

Your provider can usually tell if you have the condition by looking at your skin.Other tests may include:A skin scraping and a test called a KOH examination to check for a fungal infectionLooking at your skin with a special lamp called a Wood's lamp, to check for a bacterial infection called erythrasmaIn rare cases, a skin biopsy is needed to confirm the diagnosis Treatment options for intertrigo include:Antibiotic or antifungal cream applied to the skinDrying medicine, such as Domeboro soaksLow-dose steroid cream or immune modulating cream may be usedCreams or powders that protect the skin References

Dinulos JGH. Superficial fungal infections. In: Dinulos JGH, ed. Habif's Clinical Dermatology. 7th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2021:chap 13.James WD, Elston DM, Treat JR, Rosenbach MA, Neuhaus IM. Bacterial infections. In: James WD, Elston DM, Treat JR, Rosenbach MA, Neuhaus IM, eds. Andrews' Diseases of the Skin: Clinical Dermatology. 13th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2020:chap 14.Paller AS, Mancini AJ. Skin disorders caused by fungi. In: Paller AS, Mancini AJ, eds. Paller and Mancini - Hurwitz Clinical Pediatric Dermatology. 6th ed. St Louis, MO: Elsevier; 2022:chap 17.
Review Date 11/30/2022


Updated by: Ramin Fathi, MD, FAAD, Director, Phoenix Surgical Dermatology Group, Phoenix, AZ. Also reviewed by David C. Dugdale, MD, Medical Director, Brenda Conaway, Editorial Director, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.
Learn how to cite this page
Related MedlinePlus Health Topics

Skin Conditions
Skin Infections
