source : https://medlineplus.gov/ency/article/001462.htm 
 
 Keratosis pilaris is a common skin condition in which a protein in the skin called keratin forms hard plugs within hair follicles.Causes

Keratosis pilaris is harmless (benign). It seems to run in families. It is more common in people who have very dry skin, or who have atopic dermatitis (eczema).The condition is generally worse in winter and often clears in the summer.Symptoms

Symptoms may include:Small bumps that look like "goose bumps" on the back of the upper arms and thighsBumps feel like very rough sandpaperSkin-colored bumps are the size of a grain of sandSlight pinkness may be seen around some bumpsBumps may appear on the face and be mistaken for acne Exams and Tests

Your health care provider can usually diagnose this condition by looking at your skin. Tests are often not needed. Treatment

Treatment may include: Moisturizing lotions to soothe the skin and help it look betterSkin creams that contain urea, lactic acid, glycolic acid, salicylic acid, tretinoin, or vitamin DSteroid creams to reduce rednessImprovement often takes months, and the bumps are likely to come back if you stop using the medicine.Outlook (Prognosis)

Keratosis pilaris may fade slowly with age.When to Contact a Medical Professional

Contact your provider if the bumps are bothersome and do not get better with lotions you buy without a prescription. Images


Keratosis pilaris on the cheek
References

Bell MA, Grossberg AL. Keratosis pilaris and variants. In: Lebwohl MG, Heymann WR, Coulson IH, Murell DF, eds. Treatment of Skin Disease. 6th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2022:chap 125.Patterson JW. Diseases of cutaneous appendages. In: Patterson JW, ed. Weedon's Skin Pathology. 5th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2021:chap 16.
Review Date 10/11/2023


Updated by: Elika Hoss, MD, Assistant Professor of Dermatology, Mayo Clinic, Scottsdale, AZ. Also reviewed by David C. Dugdale, MD, Medical Director, Brenda Conaway, Editorial Director, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.
Learn how to cite this page
Related MedlinePlus Health Topics

Eczema
Skin Conditions
