source : https://medlineplus.gov/ency/article/000711.htm 
 
 Limb-girdle muscular dystrophies include at least 33 different inherited diseases. (There are 16 known genetic forms.) These disorders first affect the muscles around the shoulder girdle and hips. These diseases get worse. Eventually, it may involve other muscles.Causes

Limb-girdle muscular dystrophies are a large group of genetic diseases in which there is muscle weakness and wasting (muscular dystrophy).In most cases, both parents must pass on the non-working (defective) gene for a child to have the disease (autosomal recessive inheritance). In some rare types, only one parent needs to pass on the non-working gene to affect the child. This is called autosomal dominant inheritance. For over 25 of these conditions, the defective gene has been discovered. For others, the gene is not yet known.An important risk factor is having a family member with muscular dystrophy.Symptoms

Most often, the first sign is pelvic muscle weakness. Examples of this include trouble standing from a sitting position without using the arms, or difficulty climbing stairs. The weakness starts in childhood to young adulthood.Other symptoms include:Abnormal, sometimes waddling, walkJoints that are fixed in a contracted position (late in the disease)Large and muscular-looking calves (pseudohypertrophy), which are not actually strongLoss of muscle mass, thinning of certain body partsLow back pain Palpitations or passing-out spellsShoulder weakness Weakness of the muscles in the face (later in the disease)Weakness in the muscles of the lower legs, feet, lower arms, and hands (later in the disease)Exams and Tests

Tests may include:Blood creatine kinase levelsDNA testing (molecular genetic testing)Echocardiogram or ECGElectromyogram (EMG) testingMuscle biopsyTreatment

There are no known treatments that reverse the muscle weakness. Gene therapy may become available in the future. Supportive treatment can decrease the complications of the disease.The condition is managed based on the person's symptoms. It includes:Heart monitoringMobility aidsPhysical therapyRespiratory careWeight controlSurgery is sometimes needed for any bone or joint problems.Support Groups

The Muscular Dystrophy Association is an excellent resource: www.mda.orgOutlook (Prognosis)

In general, people tend to have weakness that slowly gets worse in affected muscles and spreads.The disease causes loss of movement. The person may be dependent on a wheelchair within 20 to 30 years.Heart muscle weakness and abnormal electrical activity of the heart can increase the risk for palpitations, fainting, and sudden death. Most people with this group of diseases live into adulthood, but do not reach their full life expectancy.Possible Complications

People with limb-girdle muscular dystrophies may experience complications such as:Abnormal heart rhythmsContractures of the jointsDifficulties with activities of daily living due to shoulder weaknessProgressive weakness, which may lead to needing a wheelchairWhen to Contact a Medical Professional

Contact your health care provider if you or your child feels weak while rising from a squatting position. Contact a geneticist if you or a family member has been diagnosed with muscular dystrophy, and you are planning a pregnancy.Prevention

Genetic counseling is now offered to affected individuals and their families. Soon molecular testing will involve whole genome sequencing on patients and their relatives to better establish the diagnosis. Genetic counseling may help some couples and families learn about the risks and help with family planning. It also allows connecting patients with diseases registries and patient organizations.Some of the complications can be prevented with appropriate treatment. For example, a cardiac pacemaker or defibrillator can greatly reduce the risk for sudden death due to an abnormal heart rhythm. Physical therapy may be able to prevent or delay contractures and improve quality of life.Affected people may want to do DNA banking. DNA testing is recommended for those who are affected. This helps to identify the family gene mutation. Once the mutation is found, prenatal DNA testing, testing for carriers, and pre-implantation genetic diagnosis are possible.Alternative Names

Muscular dystrophy - limb-girdle type (LGMD)Images


Superficial anterior muscles
References

Bharucha-Goebel
DX. Muscular dystrophies. In: Kliegman RM, St Geme JW, Blum NJ, Shah SS, Tasker
RC, Wilson KM, eds. Nelson Textbook of Pediatrics. 21st ed.
Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2020:chap 627.Finkel RS,
Mohassel P, Bönnemann CG. Congenital, limb girdle and other muscular dystrophies.
In: Swaiman KF, Ashwal S, Ferriero DM, et al, eds. Swaiman's Pediatric
Neurology. 6th ed. Elsevier; 2017:chap 147.Mohassel P,
Bönnemann CG. Limb-girdle muscular dystrophies. In: Darras BT, Jones HR, Ryan
MM, DeVivo DC, eds. Neuromuscular Disorders Of Infancy, Childhood, And
Adolescence. 2nd ed. Waltham, MA: Elsevier Academic Press; 2015:chap 34.Muscular
Dystrophy Association website. Limb-girdle muscular dystrophy (LGMD). www.mda.org/disease/limb-girdle-muscular-dystrophy.
Accessed March 30, 2022.
Review Date 11/9/2021


Updated by: Joseph V. Campellone, MD, Department of Neurology, Cooper Medical School at Rowan University, Camden, NJ. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Medical Director, Brenda Conaway, Editorial Director, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.
Learn how to cite this page
Related MedlinePlus Health Topics

Muscular Dystrophy
