source : https://medlineplus.gov/ency/article/001216.htm 
 
 Macroamylasemia is the presence of an abnormal substance called macroamylase in the blood.Causes

Macroamylase is a substance that consists of an enzyme, called amylase, attached to a protein. Because it is large, macroamylase is filtered very slowly from the blood by the kidneys.Most people with macroamylasemia do not have a serious disease that is causing it, but the condition has been associated with:Celiac diseaseLymphomaHIV infectionMonoclonal gammopathyRheumatoid arthritisUlcerative colitisSymptoms

Macroamylasemia does not cause symptoms.Exams and Tests

A blood test will show high levels of amylase. However, macroamylasemia can look similar to acute pancreatitis, which also causes high levels of amylase in the blood.Measuring amylase levels in the urine can help tell macroamylasemia apart from acute pancreatitis. Urine levels of amylase are low in people with macroamylasemia, but high in people with acute pancreatitis.References

Frasca JD, Velez MJ. Acute pancreatitis. In: Parsons PE, Wiener-Kronish JP, Stapleton RD, Berra L, eds. Critical Care Secrets. 6th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2019:chap 52.Siddiqi HA, Rabinowitz S, Axiotis CA. Laboratory diagnosis of gastrointestinal and pancreatic disorders. In: McPherson RA, Pincus MR, eds. Henry's Clinical Diagnosis and Management by Laboratory Methods. 24th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2022:chap 23.Vege SS. Acute pancreatitis. In: Feldman M, Friedman LS, Brandt LJ, eds. Sleisenger and Fordtran's Gastrointestinal and Liver Disease: Pathophysiology/Diagnosis/Management. 11th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2021:chap 58.
Review Date 10/27/2021


Updated by: Michael M. Phillips, MD, Emeritus Professor of Medicine, The George Washington University School of Medicine, Washington, DC. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Medical Director, Brenda Conaway, Editorial Director, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.  
Learn how to cite this page
Related MedlinePlus Health Topics

Pancreatic Diseases
