source : https://medlineplus.gov/ency/article/002474.htm 
 
 Mercuric chloride is a very poisonous form of mercury. It is a type of mercury salt. There are different types of mercury poisonings. This article discusses poisoning from swallowing mercuric chloride.This article is for information only. DO NOT use it to treat or manage an actual poison exposure. If you or someone you are with has an exposure, call the local emergency number (such as 911), or the local poison center can be reached directly by calling the national toll-free Poison Help hotline (1-800-222-1222) from anywhere in the United States.Poisonous Ingredient

Mercuric chloride Where Found

Mercuric chloride may be found in some:AntisepticsDry cell batteriesNote: This list may not be all inclusive.Symptoms

Symptoms of mercuric chloride poisoning include:Abdominal pain (severe)Breathing difficulty (severe)Decreased urine output (may stop completely)Diarrhea (bloody)DroolingMetallic tasteMouth lesions (sores)Pain in the throat and mouth (severe)Shock (extremely low blood pressure)Swelling in the throat (may result in throat closure and inability to breathe)Vomiting, including blood Home Care

Seek immediate medical help. DO NOT make a person throw up unless told to do so by Poison Control or a health care professional. If clothing is contaminated with the poison, try to safely remove it while protecting yourself from contact with the poison.Before Calling Emergency

The following information is helpful for emergency assistance:Person's age, weight, and conditionName of the product (ingredients and strength, if known)Time it was swallowedAmount swallowed However, DO NOT delay calling for help if this information is not immediately available.Poison Control

Your local poison control center can be reached directly by calling the national toll-free Poison Help hotline (1-800-222-1222) from anywhere in the United States. This national hotline will let you talk to experts in poisoning. They will give you further instructions.This is a free and confidential service. All local poison control centers in the United States use this national number. You should call if you have any questions about poisoning or poison prevention. It does NOT need to be an emergency. You can call for any reason, 24 hours a day, 7 days a week.Take the container with you to the hospital, if possible.What to Expect at the Emergency Room

The health care provider will measure and monitor vital signs, including temperature, pulse, breathing rate, and blood pressure. The person may receive:Airway support, including oxygen, breathing tube through the mouth (intubation), and breathing machine (ventilator)Blood and urine testsCamera down the throat (endoscopy) to see burns in the food pipe (esophagus) and stomachChest x-rayECG (electrocardiogram, or heart tracing)Fluids through a vein (intravenous or IV)Medicines to treat symptomsMedicines called chelators to remove mercury from the bloodstream and tissues, which may reduce long-term injury Outlook (Prognosis)

This substance is very poisonous. How well the person does depends on the amount of poison swallowed, what symptoms occur within the first 10 to 15 minutes after swallowing it and how quickly treatment is received. The faster a person gets medical help, the better the chance for recovery. Kidney dialysis (filtration) through a machine may be needed if the kidneys do not recover after acute mercury poisoning. Kidney failure and death can occur, even with small doses.If the poisoning has occurred slowly over time, any brain damage may be permanent.Mercuric chloride poisoning can lead to multiple organ failure and death.References

Kao LW, Rusyniak DE. Chronic poisoning: trace metals and others. In: Goldman L, Schafer AI, eds. Goldman-Cecil Medicine. 26th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2020:chap 19.Theobald JL, Mycyk MB. Iron and heavy metals. In: Walls RM, ed. Rosen's Emergency Medicine: Concepts and Clinical Practice. 10th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2023:chap 146.
Review Date 1/2/2023


Updated by:  Jesse Borke, MD, CPE, FAAEM, FACEP, Attending Physician at Kaiser Permanente, Orange County, CA. Also reviewed by David C. Dugdale, MD, Medical Director, Brenda Conaway, Editorial Director, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.
Learn how to cite this page
Related MedlinePlus Health Topics

Mercury
