source : https://medlineplus.gov/ency/article/001220.htm 
 
 A muscle disorder includes patterns of weakness, loss of muscle tissue, electromyogram (EMG) findings, or biopsy results that suggest a muscle problem. The muscle disorder can be inherited, such as muscular dystrophy, or acquired, such as alcoholic or steroid myopathy.The medical name for muscle disorder is myopathy.Symptoms

The main symptom is weakness.Other symptoms include cramps and stiffness.Exams and Tests

Your health care provider will take your medical history and perform a neurological exam. Tests that may be ordered include:Blood and urine testsElectromyography (EMG) and nerve conduction studies (NCS)Muscle biopsyGenetic tests to look for conditions that run in families. This can be tested with blood work or sometimes saliva testing.A muscle biopsy examines a tissue sample under a microscope to confirm disease. Sometimes, a blood or saliva test to check for a genetic disorder is all that is needed based on someone's symptoms and family history.Treatment

Treatment depends on the cause. It usually includes:BracingMedicines (such as corticosteroids in some cases)Physical, respiratory, and occupational therapiesPreventing the condition from getting worse by treating the underlying condition causing the muscle weaknessSurgery (sometimes)Your health care provider can tell you more about your condition and treatment options.Alternative Names

Myopathic changes; Myopathy; Muscle problemImages


Superficial anterior muscles
References

Borg K, Ensrud E. Myopathies. In: Frontera, WR, Silver JK, Rizzo TD, Jr, eds. Essentials of Physical Medicine and Rehabilitation: Musculoskeletal Disorders, Pain, and Rehabilitation. 4th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2019:chap 136.Selcen D. Muscle diseases. In: Goldman L, Schafer AI, eds. Goldman-Cecil Medicine. 26th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2020:chap 393.
Review Date 11/9/2021


Updated by: Joseph V. Campellone, MD, Department of Neurology, Cooper Medical School at Rowan University, Camden, NJ. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Medical Director, Brenda Conaway, Editorial Director, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.
Learn how to cite this page
Related MedlinePlus Health Topics

Muscle Disorders
