source : https://medlineplus.gov/ency/article/001424.htm 
 
 Myotonia congenita is an inherited condition that affects muscle relaxation. It is congenital, meaning that it is present from birth. It occurs more frequently in northern Scandinavia.Causes

Myotonia congenita is caused by a genetic change (mutation). It is passed down from either one or both parents to their children (inherited).Myotonia congenita is caused by a problem in the part of the muscle cells that are needed for muscles to relax. Abnormal repeated electrical signals occur in the muscles, causing a stiffness called myotonia.Symptoms

The hallmark of this condition is myotonia. This means the muscles are unable to quickly relax after contracting. For example, after a handshake, the person is only very slowly able to open and pull away their hand.Early symptoms may include:
  Difficulty swallowing
  
  Gagging
  
  Stiff movements that improve when they are repeated
  Shortness of breath or tightening of the chest at the beginning of exerciseFrequent fallsDifficulty opening eyes after forcing them closed or cryingChildren with myotonia congenita often look muscular and well-developed. They may not have symptoms of myotonia congenita until age 2 or 3.Exams and Tests

The health care provider may ask if there is a family history of myotonia congenita.Tests include:Electromyography (EMG, a test of the electrical activity of the muscles) and nerve conduction studies (NCS)Genetic testingMuscle biopsyTreatment

Mexiletine is a medicine that treats symptoms of myotonia congenita. Other treatments include:PhenytoinProcainamideQuinine (rarely used now, due to side effects)TocainideCarbamazepineSupport Groups

The following resources can provide more information on myotonia congenita:Muscular Dystrophy Association -- www.mda.org/disease/myotonia-congenitaNational Library of Medicine, Medline Plus -- medlineplus.gov/genetics/condition/myotonia-congenita/Outlook (Prognosis)

People with this condition can do well. Symptoms only occur when a movement is first started. After a few repetitions, the muscle relaxes and the movement becomes normal. Some people experience the opposite effect (paradoxical myotonia) and get worse with movement. Their symptoms may improve later in life.Possible Complications

Complications may include:Aspiration pneumonia caused by swallowing difficultiesFrequent choking, gagging, or trouble swallowing in an infantLong-term (chronic) joint problemsWeakness of the abdominal muscles When to Contact a Medical Professional

Contact your provider if your child has symptoms of myotonia congenita.Prevention

Couples who want to have children and who have a family history of myotonia congenita should consider genetic counseling.Alternative Names

Thomsen's disease; Becker's disease Images


Superficial anterior muscles
Deep anterior muscles
Tendons and muscles
Lower leg muscles
References

Bharucha-Goebel DX. Muscular dystrophies. In: Kliegman RM, St. Geme JW, Blum NJ, Shah SS, Tasker RC, Wilson KM, eds. Nelson Textbook of Pediatrics. 21st ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2020:chap 627.Kang MK, Kerchner GA, Ptácek LJ. Channelopathies: episodic and electrical disorders of the nervous system. In: Jankovic J, Mazziotta JC, Pomeroy SL, Newman NJ, eds. Bradley and Daroff’s Neurology in Clinical Practice. 8th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2022:chap 98.Selcen D. Muscle diseases. In: Goldman L, Schafer AI, eds. Goldman-Cecil Medicine. 26th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2020:chap 393.
Review Date 1/23/2022


Updated by: Joseph V. Campellone, MD, Department of Neurology, Cooper Medical School at Rowan University, Camden, NJ. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Medical Director, Brenda Conaway, Editorial Director, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.
Learn how to cite this page
Related MedlinePlus Health Topics

Muscle Disorders
Neuromuscular Disorders
