source : https://medlineplus.gov/ency/article/003850.htm 
 
 An oropharynx lesion biopsy is surgery in which tissue from an abnormal growth or mouth sore is removed and checked for disease.How the Test is Performed

Painkilling or numbing medicine is first applied to the area. For large sores or sores of the throat, general anesthesia may be needed. This means you will be asleep during the procedure.All or part of the problem area (lesion) is removed. It is sent to the laboratory to check for diseases. If a growth in the mouth or throat needs to be removed, the biopsy will be done first. This is followed by the actual removal of the growth.How to Prepare for the Test

If a simple painkilling or local numbing medicine is to be used, there is no special preparation. If the test is part of a growth removal or if general anesthesia is used, you will likely be asked not to eat for 6 to 8 hours before the test.How the Test will Feel


You may feel pressure or tugging while the tissue is being removed. After the numbness wears off, the area may be sore for a few days.Why the Test is Performed

This test is done to determine the cause of a sore (lesion) in the throat.Normal Results

This test is only done when there is an abnormal tissue area.What Abnormal Results Mean

Abnormal results may mean:Cancer (such as squamous cell carcinoma)Benign lesions (such as papilloma)Fungal infections (such as candida)HistoplasmosisOral lichen planusPrecancerous sore (leukoplakia)Viral infections (such as Herpes simplex) Risks

Risks of the procedure may include:Infection of the siteBleeding at the site If there is bleeding, the blood vessels may be sealed (cauterized) with an electric current or laser.Considerations

Avoid hot or spicy food after the biopsy.Alternative Names

Throat lesion biopsy; Biopsy - mouth or throat; Mouth lesion biopsy; Oral cancer - biopsyImages


Throat anatomy
Oropharyngeal biopsy
References

Dockrell DH, Ho A, Gordon SB. Community-acquired pneumonia. In: Broaddus VC, Ernst JD, King TE, et al, eds. Murray and Nadel's Textbook of Respiratory Medicine. 7th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2022:chap 46.Sinha P, Harréus U. Malignant neoplasms of the oropharynx. In: Flint PW, Francis HW, Haughey BH, et al, eds. Cummings Otolaryngology: Head and Neck Surgery. 7th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2021:chap 96.
Review Date 11/29/2022


Updated by: Josef Shargorodsky, MD, MPH, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD. Also reviewed by David C. Dugdale, MD, Medical Director, Brenda Conaway, Editorial Director, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.
Learn how to cite this page
Related MedlinePlus Health Topics

Biopsy
Mouth Disorders
Oral Cancer
Throat Cancer
Throat Disorders
