source : https://medlineplus.gov/ency/article/000247.htm 
 
 Pancreas divisum is a birth defect in which parts of the pancreas do not join together. The pancreas is a long, flat organ located between the stomach and spine. It helps in food digestion.Causes

Pancreas divisum is the most common birth defect of the pancreas. In many cases, this defect goes undetected and causes no problems. The cause of the defect is unknown.As a baby develops in the womb, two separate pieces of tissue join together to form the pancreas. Each part has a tube, called a duct. When the parts join together, a final duct, called the pancreatic duct, is formed. Fluid and digestive juices (enzymes) produced by the pancreas normally flow through this duct.Pancreas divisum occurs if the ducts do not join while the baby develops. Fluid from the two parts of the pancreas drains into separate areas of the upper portion of the small intestine (duodenum). This occurs in 5% to 15% of people.If a pancreatic duct becomes blocked, swelling and tissue damage (pancreatitis) may develop.Symptoms

Many people do not have any symptoms. If you have pancreatitis, symptoms include:Abdominal pain, most often in the upper abdomen that may be felt in the backAbdominal swelling (distention)Nausea or vomiting Exams and Tests

You may have the following tests:Abdominal ultrasoundAbdominal CT scanAmylase and lipase blood testEndoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography (ERCP)Magnetic resonance cholangiopancreatography (MRCP)Endoscopic ultrasound (EUS) Treatment

The following treatments may be needed if you have symptoms of the condition, or if pancreatitis keeps returning:ERCP with a cut to enlarge the opening where the pancreatic duct drainsPlacement of a stent to prevent the duct from getting blocked You may need surgery if these treatments do not work. Outlook (Prognosis)

Most of the time, the outcome is good.Possible Complications

The main complication of pancreas divisum is pancreatitis.When to Contact a Medical Professional

Contact your health care provider if you develop symptoms of this disorder.Prevention

Because this condition is present at birth, there is no known way to prevent it.Alternative Names

Pancreatic divisumImages


Pancreas divisum
Digestive system
Endocrine glands
Pancreas
References

Adams DB, Cote GA. Pancreas divisum and other variants of dominant dorsal duct anatomy. In: Cameron AM, Cameron JL, eds. Current Surgical Therapy. 13th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2020:515-521.Kumar V, Abbas AK, Astre JC. Pancreas. In: Kumar V, Abbas AK, Aster JC, eds. Robbins Basic Pathology. 10th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2018:chap 17.Mehta MS, Barth BA, Husain SZ. Anatomy, histology, embryology and developmental anomalies of the pancreas. In: Feldman M, Friedman LS, Brandt LJ, eds. Sleisenger and Fordtran's Gastrointestinal and Liver Disease: Pathophysiology/Diagnosis/Management. 11th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2021:chap 55.
Review Date 10/25/2021


Updated by: Michael M. Phillips, MD, Emeritus Professor of Medicine, The George Washington University School of Medicine, Washington, DC. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Medical Director, Brenda Conaway, Editorial Director, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.  
Learn how to cite this page
Related MedlinePlus Health Topics

Pancreatic Diseases
