source : https://medlineplus.gov/ency/article/000671.htm 
 
 Pneumocystis jiroveci pneumonia is a fungal infection of the lungs. The disease used to be called Pneumocystis carini or PCP pneumonia.Causes

This type of pneumonia is caused by the fungus Pneumocystis jiroveci. This fungus is common in the environment and rarely causes illness in healthy people.However, it can cause a lung infection in people with a weakened immune system due to:CancerLong-term use of corticosteroids or other medicines that weaken the immune system HIV/AIDSOrgan or bone marrow transplantPneumocystis jiroveci was a rare infection before the AIDS epidemic. Before the use of preventive antibiotics for the condition, most people in the United States with advanced AIDS often developed this infection.Symptoms

Pneumocystis pneumonia in people with AIDS usually develops slowly over days to weeks or even months, and is less severe. People with pneumocystis pneumonia who do not have AIDS usually get sick faster and are more severely ill.Symptoms include:Cough, often mild and dryFeverRapid breathingShortness of breath, especially with activity (exertion)Exams and Tests

Your health care provider will examine you and ask about your symptoms.Tests that may be ordered include:Blood gases (both arterial and venous)Bronchoscopy (with lavage)Lung biopsyX-ray of the chestSputum exam to check for fungus that causes the infectionCBCBeta-1,3 glucan level in the blood and/or lavage fluid from bronchoscopyTreatment

 Anti-infection medicines can be given by mouth (orally) or through a vein (intravenously), depending on how severe the illness is.People with low oxygen levels and moderate to severe disease are often prescribed corticosteroids as well.Outlook (Prognosis)

Pneumocystis pneumonia can be life threatening. It can cause respiratory failure that can lead to death. People with this condition need early and effective treatment. For moderate to severe pneumocystis pneumonia in people with HIV/AIDS, the short term use of corticosteroids has decreased the incidence of death.Possible Complications

Complications that may result include:Pleural effusion (extremely rare)Pneumothorax (collapsed lung)Respiratory failure (may require breathing support)When to Contact a Medical Professional

If you have a weakened immune system due to AIDS, cancer, transplantation, or corticosteroid use, contact your provider if you develop a cough, fever, or shortness of breath.Prevention

Preventive therapy is recommended for:People with HIV/AIDS who have CD4 counts below 200 cells/microliter or 200 cells/cubic millimeterBone marrow transplant recipientsOrgan transplant recipientsPeople who take long-term, high-dose corticosteroidsPeople who have had previous episodes of this infectionPeople who take long-term immunomodulatory drugsAlternative Names

Pneumocystis pneumonia; Pneumocystosis; PCP; Pneumocystis carinii; PJP pneumoniaPatient Instructions

Pneumonia in adults - discharge
Images


Lungs
AIDS
Pneumocystosis
References

Kovacs JA. Pneumocystis pneumonia. In: Goldman L, Schafer AI, eds. Goldman-Cecil Medicine. 26th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2020:chap 321.Miller RF Walzer PD, Smulian AG. Pneumocystis species. In: Bennett JE, Dolin R, Blaser MJ, eds. Mandell, Douglas, and Bennett's Principles and Practice of Infectious Diseases. 9th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2020:chap 269.
Review Date 11/23/2021


Updated by: Jatin M. Vyas, MD, PhD, Associate Professor in Medicine, Harvard Medical School; Associate in Medicine, Division of Infectious Disease, Department of Medicine, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, MA. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Medical Director, Brenda Conaway, Editorial Director, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.  
Learn how to cite this page
Related MedlinePlus Health Topics

HIV and Infections
Pneumocystis Infections
