source : https://medlineplus.gov/ency/article/000747.htm 
 
 Provisional (transient) tic disorder is a condition in which a person makes one or many brief, repeated, movements or noises (tics). These movements or noises are involuntary (not on purpose).Causes

Provisional tic disorder is common in children.The cause of provisional tic disorder can be physical or mental (psychological). It may be a mild form of Tourette syndrome.Symptoms

The child may have facial tics or tics involving movement of the arms, legs, or other areas.Tics may involve:Movements that occur again and again and do not have a rhythmAn overwhelming urge to make the movementBrief and jerky movements that include blinking, clenching the fists, jerking the arms, kicking, raising the eyebrows, sticking out the tongueThe tics often look like nervous behavior. Tics appear to get worse with stress. They do not occur during sleep.Sounds may also occur, such as:ClickingGruntingHissing
 Moaning
  
  Sniffing
  
  Snorting
  
  Squealing
  
  Throat clearing
  Exams and Tests

The health care provider will consider physical causes of transient tic disorder before making a diagnosis.In order to be diagnosed with transient tic disorder, the child must have had tics almost every day for at least 4 weeks, but less than a year.Other disorders such as anxiety, attention deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD), uncontrollable movement (myoclonus), obsessive-compulsive disorder, and epilepsy may need to be ruled out.Treatment

Providers recommend that family members do not call attention to the tics at first. This is because unwanted attention may make the tics worse. If the tics are severe enough to cause problems at school or work, behavioral techniques and medicines may help.Outlook (Prognosis)

Simple childhood tics usually disappear over a period of months.Possible Complications

There are usually no complications. A chronic motor tic disorder can develop.When to Contact a Medical Professional

Talk to your child's provider if you are concerned about a transient tic disorder, especially if it continues or disrupts your child's life. If you are not sure whether the movements are a tic or a seizure, call the provider right away.Alternative Names

Tic - transient tic disorderImages


Central nervous system and peripheral nervous system
Brain
Brain and nervous system
Brain structures
References

Ryan CA, Walter HJ, DeMaso DR, Walter HJ. Motor disorders and habits. In: Kliegman RM, St. Geme JW, Blum NJ, Shah SS, Tasker RC, Wilson KM, eds. Nelson Textbook of Pediatrics. 21st ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2020:chap 37.Tochen L, Singer HS. Tics and Tourette syndrome. In: Swaiman K, Ashwal S, Ferriero DM, et al, eds. Swaiman's Pediatric Neurology: Principles and Practice. 6th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2017:chap 98.
Review Date 1/23/2022


Updated by: Joseph V. Campellone, MD, Department of Neurology, Cooper Medical School at Rowan University, Camden, NJ. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Medical Director, Brenda Conaway, Editorial Director, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.
Learn how to cite this page
Related MedlinePlus Health Topics

Movement Disorders
Tourette Syndrome
