source : https://medlineplus.gov/ency/article/001464.htm 
 
 Pyogenic granulomas are small, raised, and red bumps on the skin. The bumps have a smooth surface and may be moist. They bleed easily because of the high number of blood vessels at the site. It is a benign (noncancerous) growth.Causes

The exact cause of pyogenic granulomas is unknown. They often appear following an injury on the hands, arms, or face.Pyogenic granulomas are common in children and pregnant women.Symptoms

Signs of a pyogenic granuloma are:A small red lump on the skin that bleeds easilyOften found at the site of a recent injuryUsually seen on hands, arms, and face, but they may develop in the mouth (most often in pregnant women) Exams and Tests

Your health care provider will do a physical exam to diagnose this condition.You may also need a skin biopsy to confirm the diagnosis and rule out skin cancer.Treatment

Small pyogenic granulomas may go away without treatment. If needed, bumps are treated with:Surgical shaving or excisionElectrocautery (heat) FreezingA laserCreams applied to the skin (may not be as effective as surgery)Outlook (Prognosis)

Most pyogenic granulomas can be removed. A scar may remain after treatment. There is a high chance that the problem will come back if the whole lesion is not removed or destroyed during treatment.Possible Complications

These problems may occur:Bleeding from the lesionReturn of the condition after treatment When to Contact a Medical Professional

Contact your provider if you have a skin bump that bleeds easily or that changes appearance.Alternative Names

Lobular capillary hemangiomaImages


Pyogenic granuloma - close-up
Pyogenic granuloma on the hand
References

Dinulos JGH. Vascular tumors and malformations. In: Dinulos JGH, ed. Habif's Clinical Dermatology. 7th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2021:chap 23.Patterson JW. Vascular tumors. In: Patterson JW, ed. Weedon's Skin Pathology. 5th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Limited; 2021:chap 39.
Review Date 11/30/2022


Updated by: Ramin Fathi, MD, FAAD, Director, Phoenix Surgical Dermatology Group, Phoenix, AZ. Also reviewed by David C. Dugdale, MD, Medical Director, Brenda Conaway, Editorial Director, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.
Learn how to cite this page
Related MedlinePlus Health Topics

Benign Tumors
Skin Conditions
