source : https://medlineplus.gov/ency/article/001037.htm 
 
 Rhinophyma is a large red-colored (ruddy) nose. The nose has a bulb shape.Causes

Rhinophyma was once thought to be caused by heavy alcohol use. This is not correct. Rhinophyma occurs equally in people who do not use alcohol and in those who drink heavily. The problem is much more common in men than in women.The cause of rhinophyma is unknown. It may be a severe form of a skin disease called rosacea. It is an uncommon disorder.Symptoms

Symptoms include changes in the nose, such as:Bulb-like (bulbous) shapeMany oil glandsReddish color (possible)Thickening of the skinWaxy, yellow surface Exams and Tests

Most of the time, a health care provider can diagnose rhinophyma without any tests. Sometimes a skin biopsy may be needed.Treatment

The most common treatment is surgery to reshape the nose. Surgery may be done with a laser, scalpel, or rotating brush (dermabrasion). Certain acne medicines may also help treat the condition.Outlook (Prognosis)

Rhinophyma can be corrected with surgery. The condition may return.Possible Complications

Rhinophyma can cause emotional distress. This is because of the way it looks.When to Contact a Medical Professional

Contact your provider if you have symptoms of rhinophyma and would like to talk about treatment.Alternative Names

Bulbous nose; Nose - bulbous; Phymatous rosaceaImages


Rosacea
References

Dinulos JGH. Acne, rosacea, and related disorders. In: Dinulos JGH, ed. Habif's Clinical Dermatology. 7th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2021:chap 7.Grande DJ. Rhinophyma. In: Lebwohl MG, Heymann WR, Coulson IH, Murrell DF, eds. Treatment of Skin Disease: Comprehensive Therapeutic Strategies. 6th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2022:chap 218.
Review Date 11/18/2022


Updated by: Elika Hoss, MD, Assistant Professor of Dermatology, Mayo Clinic, Scottsdale, AZ. Also reviewed by David C. Dugdale, MD, Medical Director, Brenda Conaway, Editorial Director, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.   
Learn how to cite this page
Related MedlinePlus Health Topics

Nose Injuries and Disorders
Rosacea
