source : https://medlineplus.gov/ency/article/000884.htm 
 
 Seborrheic keratosis is a condition that causes wart-like growths on the skin. The growths are noncancerous (benign). Causes

A seborrheic keratosis is a benign form of skin tumor. The cause is unknown.The condition commonly appears after age 40. It tends to run in families.Symptoms

Symptoms of seborrheic keratosis are skin growths that:Are located on the face, chest, shoulders, back, or other areas, except the lips, palms, and solesAre painless, but may become irritated and itchyAre most often tan, brown, or blackHave a slightly raised, flat surfaceMay have a rough texture (like a wart)Often have a waxy surfaceAre round or ovalMay look like a piece of bee's wax that has been "pasted-on" the skinOften appear in clusters Exams and Tests

Your health care provider will look at the growths to determine if you have the condition. You may need a skin biopsy to confirm the diagnosis.Treatment

You generally do not need treatment unless growths get irritated or affect your appearance.Growths may be removed with surgery or freezing (cryotherapy).Outlook (Prognosis)

Removing the growths is simple and generally does not cause scars. You may have patches of lighter skin where growths on the torso have been removed.Growths usually do not return after they are removed. You may develop more growths in the future if you are prone to the condition.Possible Complications

These complications may occur:Irritation, bleeding, or discomfort of growthsMistake in diagnosis (growths may look like skin cancer tumors)Distress due to physical appearanceWhen to Contact a Medical Professional

Contact your provider if you have symptoms of seborrheic keratosis.Also contact if you have new symptoms, such as:A change in the appearance of the skin growthNew growthsA growth that looks like seborrheic keratosis, but occurs by itself or has ragged borders and irregular color. Your provider will need to examine it for skin cancer.Alternative Names

Benign skin tumors - keratosis; Keratosis - seborrheic; Senile keratosis; Senile verrucaImages


Irritated Seborrheic Kerotosis - neck
References

Fitzpatrick JE, High WA, Kyle WL. Papillomatous and verrucous lesions. In: Fitzpatrick JE, High WA, Kyle WL, eds. Urgent Care Dermatology: Symptom-Based Diagnosis. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2018:chap 28.James WD, Elston DM, Treat JR, Rosenbach MA, Neuhaus IM. Epidermal nevi, neoplasms, and cysts. In: James WD, Elston DM, Treat JR, Rosenbach MA, Neuhaus IM, eds. Andrews' Diseases of the Skin: Clinical Dermatology. 13th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2020:chap 29.Marks JG, Miller JJ. Epidermal growths. In: Marks JG, Miller JJ, eds. Lookingbill and Marks' Principles of Dermatology. 6th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2019:chap 5.Patterson JW. Tumors of the epidermis. In: Patterson JW, ed. Weedon's Skin Pathology. 5th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Limited; 2021:chap 32.Requena L, Requena C, Cockerell CJ. Benign epidermal tumors and proliferations. In: Bolognia JL, Schaffer JV, Cerroni L, eds. Dermatology. 4th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2018:chap 109.
Review Date 11/18/2022


Updated by: Elika Hoss, MD, Assistant Professor of Dermatology, Mayo Clinic, Scottsdale, AZ. Also reviewed by David C. Dugdale, MD, Medical Director, Brenda Conaway, Editorial Director, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.    
Learn how to cite this page
Related MedlinePlus Health Topics

Benign Tumors
Skin Conditions
