source : https://medlineplus.gov/ency/article/000430.htm 
 
 Septic arthritis is inflammation of a joint due to a bacterial or fungal infection. Septic arthritis that is due to the bacteria that cause gonorrhea, has different symptoms and is called gonococcal arthritis.Causes

Septic arthritis develops when bacteria or other tiny disease-causing organisms (microorganisms) spread through the blood to a joint. It may also occur when the joint is directly infected with a microorganism from an injury or during surgery. Joints that are commonly affected are the knee and hip.Most cases of acute septic arthritis are caused by staphylococcus or streptococcus bacteria.Chronic septic arthritis (which is less common) is caused by organisms including Mycobacterium tuberculosis and Candida albicans.The following conditions increase your risk for septic arthritis:Artificial joint implantsBacterial infection somewhere else in your bodyPresence of bacteria in your bloodChronic illness or disease (such as diabetes, rheumatoid arthritis, and sickle cell disease)Intravenous (IV) or injection drug useMedicines that suppress your immune systemRecent joint injuryRecent joint arthroscopy or other joint surgery Septic arthritis may be seen at any age. In children, it occurs most often in those younger than 3 years. The hip is often the site of infection in infants. Most cases are caused by the bacteria group B streptococcus. Another common cause is Haemophilus influenza, especially if the child has not been vaccinated for this bacterium.Symptoms

Symptoms usually come on quickly. There is a fever and joint swelling that is usually in just one joint. There is also intense joint pain, which gets worse with movement.Symptoms in newborns or infants:Crying when infected joint is moved (for example, during diaper changes)FeverNot able to move the limb with the infected joint (pseudoparalysis)Fussiness Symptoms in children and adults:Not able to move the limb with the infected joint (pseudoparalysis)Severe joint painJoint swellingJoint rednessFever Chills may occur, but are uncommon.Exams and Tests

Your health care provider will examine the joint and ask about the symptoms.Tests that may be done include:Aspiration of joint fluid for cell count, examination of crystals under the microscope, Gram stain, and cultureBlood cultureX-ray of affected jointBlood work including complete blood count (CBC)Treatment

Antibiotics are used to treat the infection.Resting, raising the joint above heart level, and using cool compresses may help relieve pain. After the joint starts to heal, exercising it can help speed up recovery.If joint (synovial) fluid builds up quickly due to the infection, a needle may be inserted into the joint to withdraw (aspirate) the fluid. Severe cases may need surgery to drain the infected joint fluid and irrigate (wash) the joint.Outlook (Prognosis)

Recovery is good with prompt antibiotic treatment. If treatment is delayed, permanent joint damage may result.When to Contact a Medical Professional

Contact for an appointment with your provider if you develop symptoms of septic arthritis.Prevention

Preventive (prophylactic) antibiotics may be helpful for people at high risk.Alternative Names

Bacterial arthritis; Non-gonococcal bacterial arthritisImages


Bacteria
References

Cook PP, Siraj DS. Bacterial arthritis. In: Firestein GS, Budd RC, Gabriel SE, Koretzky GA, McInnes IB, O'Dell JR, eds. Firestein & Kelley's Textbook of Rheumatology. 11th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2021:chap 116.Robinette E, Shah SS. Septic arthritis. In: Kliegman RM, St. Geme JW, Blum NJ, Shah SS, Tasker RC, Wilson KM, eds. Nelson Textbook of Pediatrics. 21st ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2020:chap 705.
Review Date 5/19/2023


Updated by: Jatin M. Vyas, MD, PhD, Associate Professor in Medicine, Harvard Medical School; Associate in Medicine, Division of Infectious Disease, Department of Medicine, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, MA. Also reviewed by David C. Dugdale, MD, Medical Director, Brenda Conaway, Editorial Director, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.  
Learn how to cite this page
Related MedlinePlus Health Topics

Infectious Arthritis
