source : https://medlineplus.gov/ency/article/002737.htm 
 
 Shampoo is a liquid used to clean the scalp and hair. This article describes the effects of swallowing a liquid shampoo.This article is for information only. DO NOT use it to treat or manage an actual poison exposure. If you or someone you are with has an exposure, call the local emergency number (such as 911), or the local poison control center can be reached directly by calling the national toll-free Poison Help hotline (1-800-222-1222) from anywhere in the United States.Where Found

The ingredients are found in various liquid shampoos.Symptoms

Symptoms may include:VomitingDiarrheaIf you have an allergy to a dye in the shampoo, you may develop tongue and throat swelling, wheezing, and trouble breathing.Home Care

Shampoo is considered relatively nontoxic (nonpoisonous). If an allergic reaction occurs, seek immediate medical help. Call 911 or the local emergency number.Call poison control for further information.Before Calling Emergency

Determine the following information:The person's age, weight, and conditionThe name of the product (ingredients and strengths, if known)The time it was swallowedThe amount swallowed Poison Control

Your local poison control center can be reached directly by calling the national toll-free Poison Help hotline (1-800-222-1222) from anywhere in the United States. This national hotline will let you talk to experts in poisoning. They will give you further instructions.This is a free and confidential service. All local poison control centers in the United States use this national number. You should call if you have any questions about poisoning or poison prevention. It does NOT need to be an emergency. You can call for any reason, 24 hours a day, 7 days a week.Take the container with you to the hospital, if possible.What to Expect at the Emergency Room

An emergency room visit may not be needed.If a visit takes place, the health care provider will measure and monitor the person's vital signs, including temperature, pulse, breathing rate, and blood pressure. Blood and urine tests will be done. The person may receive:Fluids through a vein (IV)Medicines to treat symptoms A person who has an allergic reaction may need:Airway and breathing support, including oxygen. In extreme cases, a tube may be passed through the mouth into the lungs to prevent aspiration. A breathing machine (ventilator) would then be needed.Chest x-ray.ECG (electrocardiogram, or heart tracing).Outlook (Prognosis)

Shampoo is most often not poisonous. Most people make a full recovery.Alternative Names

Swallowing shampooReferences

Meehan TJ. Care of the poisoned patient. In: Walls RM, ed. Rosen's Emergency Medicine: Concepts and Clinical Practice. 10th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2023:chap 135.Theobald JL, Kostic MA. Poisoning. In: Kliegman RM, St. Geme JW, Blum NJ, Shah SS, Tasker RC, Wilson KM, eds. Nelson Textbook of Pediatrics. 21st ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2020:chap 77.
Review Date 10/6/2022


Updated by: Jesse Borke, MD, CPE, FAAEM, FACEP, Attending Physician at Kaiser Permanente, Orange County, CA. Also reviewed by David C. Dugdale, MD, Medical Director, Brenda Conaway, Editorial Director, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.
Learn how to cite this page
Related MedlinePlus Health Topics

Cosmetics
