source : https://medlineplus.gov/ency/article/003451.htm 
 
 Skin lesion aspiration is the withdrawal of fluid from a skin lesion (sore).How the Test is Performed

The health care provider inserts a needle into the skin sore or skin abscess, which may contain fluid or pus. Fluid from the sore or abscess is withdrawn. The fluid may be examined under a microscope. A sample of the fluid may also be sent to a lab. There, it is put in a lab dish or other container that contains (culture medium) and watched for growth of bacteria, virus or fungi.If the sore is deep, the provider may inject or spray numbing medicine (anesthetic) into the skin before inserting the needle.How to Prepare for the Test

You do not need to prepare for this test.How the Test will Feel

You may feel a pricking sensation as the needle enters the skin.In many cases, removing the fluid will lessen pressure within the skin sore and ease pain.Why the Test is Performed

This test is used to find the cause of a fluid-filled skin lesion. It can be used to diagnose skin infections or cancers.What Abnormal Results Mean

Abnormal results may be a sign of infection caused by bacteria, fungi, or viruses. Cancer cells may also be seen.Risks

There is a small risk of bleeding, mild pain, or infection.Images


Skin lesion aspiration
References

Chernecky CC, Berger BJ. Biopsy, site-specific - specimen. In: Chernecky CC, Berger BJ, eds. Laboratory Tests and Diagnostic Procedures. 6th ed. St Louis, MO: Elsevier Saunders; 2013:199-202.Marks JG, Miller JJ. Dermatologic therapy and procedures. In: Marks JG, Miller JJ, eds. Lookingbill and Marks' Principles of Dermatology. 6th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2019:chap 4.
Review Date 11/30/2022


Updated by: Ramin Fathi, MD, FAAD, Director, Phoenix Surgical Dermatology Group, Phoenix, AZ. Also reviewed by David C. Dugdale, MD, Medical Director, Brenda Conaway, Editorial Director, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.
Learn how to cite this page
Related MedlinePlus Health Topics

Abscess
Skin Infections
