source : https://medlineplus.gov/ency/article/000116.htm 
 
 Solitary fibrous tumor (SFT) is a noncancerous tumor of the lining of the lung and chest cavity, an area called the pleura. SFT used to be called localized fibrous mesothelioma.Causes

The exact cause of SFT remains unknown. This type of tumor affects men and women equally. Symptoms

About one half of the people with this type of tumor do not show any symptoms.If the tumor grows to a large size and pushes on the lung, it can lead to symptoms, such as:Chest painChronic coughShortness of breathClubbed appearance of the fingersExams and Tests

SFT is usually found by accident when a chest x-ray is done for other reasons. If the health care provider suspects SFT, tests will be ordered. These may include:CT scan of the chestOpen lung biopsyPulmonary function testsThe diagnosis of SFT is difficult compared with the cancerous type of this disease, called malignant mesothelioma, which is caused by exposure to asbestos (as cancer needs to be ruled out). SFT is not caused by asbestos exposure.Treatment

SFT is usually treated by removing the tumor.Outlook (Prognosis)

The outcome is expected to be good with prompt treatment. In rare cases, the tumor may return.Possible Complications

Fluid escaping into the membranes around the lungs (pleural effusion) is a complication.When to Contact a Medical Professional

Contact your provider for an appointment if you notice symptoms of SFT.Alternative Names

Mesothelioma - benign; Mesothelioma - fibrous; Pleural fibroma
Images


Respiratory system
References

Kaidar-Person O, Zagar T, Haithcock BE, Weiss, J. Diseases of the pleura and mediastinum. In: Niederhuber JE, Armitage JO, Kastan MB, Doroshow JH, Tepper JE, eds. Abeloff's Clinical Oncology. 6th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2020:chap 70.Konopka K, Arenberg DA. Benign lung tumors. In: Broaddus VC, Ernst JD, King Jr TE, et al, eds. Murray and Nadel's Textbook of Respiratory Medicine. 7th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2022:chap 80.
Review Date 7/31/2022


Updated by: Denis Hadjiliadis, MD, MHS, Paul F. Harron, Jr. Professor of Medicine, Pulmonary, Allergy, and Critical Care, Perelman School of Medicine, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA. Also reviewed by David C. Dugdale, MD, Medical Director, Brenda Conaway, Editorial Director, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.
Learn how to cite this page
Related MedlinePlus Health Topics

Mesothelioma
