source : https://medlineplus.gov/ency/article/001095.htm 
 
 Spider angioma is an abnormal collection of blood vessels near the surface of the skin.Causes

Spider angiomas are very common. They often occur in pregnant women and in people with liver disease. They can appear in both children and adults. They get their name because the mark looks similar to a red spider.They appear most often on the face, neck, upper part of the trunk, arms, and fingers.Symptoms

The main symptom is a blood vessel spot that:May have a red dot in the centerHas reddish extensions that reach out from the centerDisappears when pressed on and comes back when pressure is released In rare cases, bleeding occurs in a spider angioma. Exams and Tests

The health care provider will examine the spider angioma on your skin. You may be asked if you have any other symptoms.Most of the time, you do not need tests to diagnose the condition. But sometimes, a skin biopsy is needed to confirm the diagnosis. Blood tests may be done if a liver problem is suspected.Treatment

Spider angiomas usually do not need treatment, but burning (electrocautery) or laser treatment is sometimes done.Outlook (Prognosis)

Spider angiomas in children may disappear after puberty, and often disappear after a woman gives birth. Untreated, spider angiomas tend to last in adults.Treatment is often successful.When to Contact a Medical Professional

Let your provider know if you have a new spider angioma so that other related medical conditions can be ruled out.Alternative Names

Nevus araneus; Spider telangiectasia; Vascular spider; Spider nevus; Arterial spidersReferences

Dinulos JGH. Vascular tumors and malformations. In: Dinulos JGH, ed. Habif's Clinical Dermatology. 7th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2021:chap 23.Martin KL. Vascular disorders. In: Kliegman RM, St. Geme JW, Blum NJ, Shah SS. Tasker RC, Wilson KM, eds. Nelson Textbook of Pediatrics. 21st ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2020:chap 669.
Review Date 11/18/2022


Updated by: Elika Hoss, MD, Assistant Professor of Dermatology, Mayo Clinic, Scottsdale, AZ. Also reviewed by David C. Dugdale, MD, Medical Director, Brenda Conaway, Editorial Director, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.   
Learn how to cite this page
Related MedlinePlus Health Topics

Vascular Diseases
