source : https://medlineplus.gov/ency/article/003064.htm 
 
 An abnormally shaped tooth is any tooth that deviates from its regular shape.Considerations

The appearance of normal teeth varies, especially the molars. Abnormally-shaped teeth can result from many different conditions. Specific diseases can affect tooth shape, tooth color, and when they grow in. Some diseases can lead to absence of teeth.Causes

Some diseases that can cause abnormal tooth shape and growth are:Congenital syphilisCerebral palsyEctodermal dysplasia, anhidroticIncontinentia pigmenti achromiansCleidocranial dysostosisEhlers-Danlos syndromeEllis-van Creveld syndromeWhen to Contact a Medical Professional

Talk to a dentist or health care provider if the shape of your child's teeth appears to be abnormal.What to Expect at Your Office Visit

The dentist will examine the mouth and teeth. You will be asked questions about your child's medical history and symptoms, such as:Does your child have any medical conditions that may cause abnormal tooth shape?At what age did the teeth appear?In what order did the teeth appear?Does your child have other tooth problems (color, spacing)?What other symptoms are also present? Braces, fillings (bonding), and dental restorations such as crowns, veneers, or bridges may be needed to correct the abnormal shape and improve the appearance and spacing of the teeth.Dental x-rays and other diagnostic tests may be done.Alternative Names

Hutchinson incisors; Abnormal tooth shape; Peg teeth; Mulberry teeth; Conical teeth; Connate teeth; Conjoined teeth; Microdontia; Macrodontia; Mulberry molarsReferences

Dhar V. Development and developmental anomalies of the teeth. In: Kliegman RM, St. Geme JW, Blum NJ, Shah SS, Tasker RC, Wilson KM, eds. Nelson Textbook of Pediatrics. 21st ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2020:chap 333.Moore KL, Persuad TVN, Torchia MG. Integumentary system. In: Moore KL, Persuad TVN, Torchia MG, eds. The Developing Human. 11th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier.2020:chap 19.Neville BW, Damm DD, Allen CM, Chi AC. Abnormalities of teeth. In: Neville BW, Damm DD, Allen CM, Chi AC, eds. Oral and Maxillofacial Pathology. 4th ed. St Louis, MO: Elsevier; 2016:chap 2 
Review Date 1/24/2022


Updated by: Michael Kapner, DDS, General Dentistry, Norwalk Medical Center, Norwalk CT. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Medical Director, Brenda Conaway, Editorial Director, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.
Learn how to cite this page
Related MedlinePlus Health Topics

Tooth Disorders
