source : https://medlineplus.gov/ency/article/000988.htm 
 
 Tracheitis is a bacterial infection of the windpipe (trachea).Causes

Bacterial tracheitis is most often caused by the bacteria Staphylococcus aureus. It often follows a viral upper respiratory infection. It affects mostly young children. This may be due to their tracheas being smaller and more easily blocked by swelling. Symptoms

Symptoms include:Deep cough (similar to that caused by croup)Difficulty breathingHigh feverHigh-pitched breathing sound (stridor) Exams and Tests

The health care provider will perform a physical exam and listen to the child's lungs. The muscles between the ribs may pull in as the child tries to breathe. This is called intercostal retractions.Tests that may be done to diagnose this condition include:Blood oxygen levelNasopharyngeal culture to look for bacteriaTracheal culture to look for bacteriaX-ray of the trachea or neckTracheoscopyTreatment

The child often needs to have a tube placed into the airways to help with breathing. This is called an endotracheal tube. Bacterial debris often needs to be removed from the trachea at that time.The child will receive antibiotics through a vein. The health care team will closely monitor the child's breathing and use oxygen, if needed.Outlook (Prognosis)

With prompt treatment, the child should recover.Possible Complications

Complications may include:Airway obstruction (can lead to death)Toxic shock syndrome if the condition was caused by the bacteria staphylococcusWhen to Contact a Medical Professional

Tracheitis is an emergency medical condition. Go to the emergency room right away if your child has had a recent upper respiratory infection and suddenly has a high fever, a cough that gets worse, or trouble breathing.Alternative Names

Bacterial tracheitis; Acute bacterial tracheitisReferences

Cai Y, Meyer A. Pediatric infectious disease. In: Flint PW, Francis HW, Haughey BH, et al, eds. Cummings Otolaryngology: Head and Neck Surgery. 7th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2021:chap 201.Rodrigues KK, Roosevelt GE. Acute inflammatory upper respiratory obstruction (croup, epiglottitis, laryngitis, and bacterial tracheitis). In: Kliegman RM, St. Geme JW, Blum NJ, Shah SS, Tasker RC, Wilson KM, eds. Nelson Textbook of Pediatrics. 21st ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2020:chap 412.Rose E. Pediatric respiratory emergencies: upper airway obstruction and infections. In: Walls RM, ed. Rosen's Emergency Medicine: Concepts and Clinical Practice. 10th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2023:chap 162.Wenzel RP. Acute bronchitis and tracheitis. In: Goldman L, Schafer AI, eds. Goldman-Cecil Medicine. 26th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2020:chap 90.
Review Date 11/29/2022


Updated by: Josef Shargorodsky, MD, MPH, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD. Also reviewed by David C. Dugdale, MD, Medical Director, Brenda Conaway, Editorial Director, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.
Learn how to cite this page
Related MedlinePlus Health Topics

Staphylococcal Infections
Tracheal Disorders
