source : https://medlineplus.gov/ency/article/001963.htm 
 
 Studies have shown that adults who drink light to moderate amounts of alcohol may be less likely to develop heart disease than those who do not drink at all or are heavy drinkers. However, people who do not drink alcohol should not start just because they want to avoid developing heart disease.Information

There is a fine line between healthy drinking and risky drinking. Do not begin drinking or drink more often just to lower your risk of heart disease. Heavier drinking can harm the heart and liver. Heart disease is the leading cause of death in people who abuse alcohol.Health care providers recommend that if you drink alcohol, drink only light to moderate amounts:For men, limit alcohol to 1 to 2 drinks a day.For women, limit alcohol to 1 drink a day. One drink is defined as: 4 ounces (118 milliliters, mL) of wine12 ounces (355 mL) of beer1 1/2 ounces (44 mL) of 80-proof spirits1 ounce (30 mL) of 100-proof spirits Though research has found that alcohol use may be associated with a lower chance of heart disease, much more effective ways to prevent heart disease include:Controlling blood pressure and cholesterolExercising and following a low-fat, healthy dietNot smokingMaintaining an ideal weightAnyone who has heart disease or heart failure should talk to their provider before drinking alcohol. Alcohol can make heart failure and other heart problems worse.Alternative Names

Health and wine; Wine and heart disease; Preventing heart disease - wine; Preventing heart disease - alcoholImages


Wine and health
References

Kloner RA, Rezkalla S. Cardiomyopathies induced by drugs or toxins. In: Libby P, Bonow RO, Mann DL, Tomaselli GF, Bhatt DL, Solomon SD, eds. Braunwald's Heart Disease: A Textbook of Cardiovascular Medicine.12th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2022:chap 84.Mozaffarian D. Nutrition and cardiovascular and metabolic diseases. In: Libby P, Bonow RO, Mann DL, Tomaselli GF, Bhatt DL, Solomon SD, eds. Braunwald's Heart Disease: A Textbook of Cardiovascular Medicine.12th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2022:chap 29.Snetselaar LG, de Jesus JM, DeSilva DM, Stoody EE. Dietary guidelines for Americans, 2020-2025: understanding the scientific process, guidelines, and key recommendations. Nutr Today. 2021;56(6):287-295. PMID: 34987271 pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/34987271/.
Review Date 5/12/2022


Updated by: Linda J. Vorvick, MD, Clinical Associate Professor, Department of Family Medicine, UW Medicine, School of Medicine, University of Washington, Seattle, WA. Also reviewed by David C. Dugdale, MD, Medical Director, Brenda Conaway, Editorial Director, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.
Learn how to cite this page
Related MedlinePlus Health Topics

Alcohol
